 Quantum Physics for beginners
 A simple guide for discovering the hidden side of
                       reality.
Master the theory of relativity and the mechanics of
 particles like Einstein | With easy and practical
                     examples!
                           Table of Contents
Chapter 1 A pleasant surprise
Chapter 2 The beginning
Chapter 3 What is light?
Chapter 4 Mr. Planck
Chapter 5 An uncertain Heisenberg
Chapter 6 Quantum
Chapter 7 Einstein and Bohr
Chapter 8 Quantum Physics in Present Times
Chapter 9 The third millennium
Chapter 1
A pleasant surprise




B efore the quantum era, science lived on decisive pronouncements on
  causes and effects of motions: well defined objects moved along precise
    trajectories, in response to the action of various forces. But the science
that we now call classical, emerged from the mists of a long history and
duration until the end of the nineteenth century, overlooked the fact that each
object was actually made up of a gigantic number of atoms. In a grain of
sand, for example, there are several billion of them.
Before the quantum era, who observed a phenomenon was like an alien from
space, who looked at the Earth from above and noticed only the movements
of large crowds of thousands and thousands of people. Maybe they saw them
marching in compact ranks, or applauding, or hurrying to work, or scattering
in the streets. But nothing they observed could ever prepare them for what
they would see by focusing their attention on individuals. On an individual
level, humans showed behavior that could not be deduced from that of
crowds - things like laughter, affection, compassion and creativity. Aliens,
perhaps robotic probes or evolved insects, may not have had the right words
to describe what they saw when they observed us closely. On the other hand,
even we, today, with all the literature and poetry accumulated over the
millennia, sometimes we can not fully understand the individual experiences
of other human beings.
At the beginning of the 20th century something similar happened. The
complex building of physics, with its exact predictions about the behavior of
objects, i.e. crowds of atoms, suddenly collapsed. Thanks to new,
sophisticated experiments, conducted with great skill, it was possible to study
the properties not only of individual atoms, but also of the smaller particles of
which they were made. It was like going from listening to an orchestral
ensemble to quartets, trios and solo pieces. And the atoms seemed to behave
in a disconcerting way in the eyes of the greatest physicists of the time, who
were awakening from the sleep of the classical age. They were explorers of
an unprecedented world, the equivalent of the poetic, artistic and musical
avant-garde of the time. Among them were the most famous: Heinrich Hertz,
Ernest Rutherford, J. J. Thomson, Niels Bohr, Marie Curie, Werner
Heisenberg, Erwin Schrödinger, Paul Dirac, Louis-Victor de Broglie, Albert
Einstein, Max Born, Max Planck and Wolfgang Pauli. The shock they felt
after poking around inside the atoms was equal to what the crew of the
Enterprise must have experienced when they first encountered an alien
civilization found in the vastness of the cosmos. The confusion produced by
the examination of the new data slowly stimulated the first, desperate
attempts by physicists to restore some order and logic in their science. At the
end of the twenties of the last century the fundamental structure of the atom
could be said by now known in broad lines, and it could be applied to the
chemistry and physics of ordinary matter. Mankind had begun to really
understand what was happening in the new, bizarre quantum world.
But while the crew of the Enterprise could always be teleported away from
the most hostile worlds, the physicists of the early twentieth century did not
go back: they realized that the strange laws they were discovering were
fundamental and were the basis of the behavior of all matter in the universe.
Since everything, including humans, is made of atoms, it is impossible to
escape the consequences of what happens at the atomic level. We have
discovered an alien world, and that world is within us!
The shocking consequences of their discoveries upset not a few scientists of
the time. A bit like revolutionary ideologies, quantum physics consumed
many of its prophets. In this case the ruin did not come from political
machinations or conspiracies of adversaries, but from disconcerting and deep
philosophical problems that had to do with the idea of reality. When, towards
the end of the 1920s, it became clear to everyone that a real revolution had
occurred in physics, many of those who had given it the initial impetus,
including a figure of the caliber of Albert Einstein, repented and turned their
backs on the theory they had contributed significantly to creating. Yet today,
well underway in the 21st century, we use quantum physics and apply it to a
thousand situations. Thanks to her we have invented for example transistors,
lasers, atomic energy and countless other things. Some physicists, even
prominent ones, continue to use all their strength to find a version of quantum
mechanics softer for our common sense, less destructive than the common
idea of reality. But it would be good to reckon with science, not with some
palliative.
Before the quantum era, physics had managed very well to describe the
phenomena that happen before our eyes, solving problems in a world made of
stairs firmly resting on the walls, arrows and cannonballs launched according
to precise trajectories, planets orbiting and rotating on themselves, comets
returning to the expected time, steam engines doing their useful work,
telegraphs and electric motors. In short, at the beginning of the twentieth
century almost every observable and measurable macroscopic phenomenon
had found a coherent explanation within the so-called classical physics. But
the attempt to apply the same laws to the strange microscopic world of atoms
proved incredibly difficult, with deep philosophical implications. The theory
that seemed to come out, the quantum theory, went completely against
common sense.
Our intuition is based on previous experiences, so we can say that even
classical science, in this sense, was sometimes counterintuitive, at least for
the people of the time. When Galileo discovered the laws of ideal motion in
the absence of friction, his ideas were considered extremely daring (in a
world where no one or almost no one had thought to neglect the effects of
friction).2 But the classical physics that emerged from his intuitions managed
to redefine common sense for three centuries, until the 20th century. It
seemed a solid theory, resistant to radical changes - until quantum physics
burst onto the scene, leading to an existential shock like never before.
To really understand the behavior of atoms, to create a theory that would
agree with the seemingly contradictory data that came out of the laboratories
in the thirty years between 1900 and 1930, it was necessary to act in a radical
way, with a new audacity. The equations, which until then calculated with
precision the dynamics of events, became tools to obtain fans of possibilities,
each of which could happen with a given probability. Newton's laws, with
their certainties (so we speak of "classical determinism") were replaced by
Schrödinger's equations and Heisenberg's disconcerting mathematical
constructions, which spoke the language of indeterminacy and nuance.
How does this uncertainty manifest itself in nature, at the atomic level? In
various areas, of which here we can give a first, simple example. Atomic
physics tells us that given a certain amount of radioactive material, let's say
uranium, half will transform thanks to a process called "decay" and will
disappear before a fixed period of time, called "half-life" or "half-life". After
another time interval equal to the half-life, the remaining atoms will be
reduced another time by half (so after a time as long as two half-lives the
amount of uranium present at the beginning will be reduced to a quarter of
the original; after three half-lives, to an eighth; and so on). Thanks to
quantum mechanics and some complicated equations, we are able to calculate
in principle the value of the half-life of uranium, and of many other
fundamental particles. We can put at work arrays of theoretical physicists and
get many interesting results. Yet, we are absolutely not able to predict when a
certain uranium atom will decay.
It is a disconcerting result. If uranium atoms were to follow the laws of
classical Newtonian physics, there would be some mechanism at work that,
provided we perform the calculations accurately, would allow us to predict
exactly when a certain atom will decay. Quantum laws do not offer
deterministic mechanisms and give us probability and data blurred not for
simple ignorance of the problem, but for deeper reasons: according to the
theory, the probability that the decay of that atom happens in a certain period
is all we can know.
Let's go to another example. Let's consider two identical photons (the
particles of which the light is made) and shoot them in the direction of a
window. There are several alternatives: both of them bounce on the glass,
both of them cross it, one bounces and one crosses it. Well, quantum physics
is not able to predict how the single photons will behave, whose future is not
known even in principle. We can only calculate the probability with which
the various alternatives will happen - for example that such a photon will be
rejected at 10% and will pass to 90%, but nothing more. Quantum physics
may seem vague and inaccurate at this point, but it actually provides the
correct procedures (the only correct procedures, to be precise) that allow us to
understand how matter works. It is also the only way to understand the
atomic world, the structure and behavior of particles, the formation of
molecules, the mechanism of radiation (the light we see comes from atoms).
Thanks to her we were able, in a second time, to penetrate into the nucleus, to
understand how the quarks that form protons and neutrons are bound
together, how the Sun gets its gigantic energy, and more.
But how is it possible that the physics of Galileo and Newton, so tragically
inadequate to describe the atomic motions, is able to predict with few, elegant
equations the motions of celestial bodies, phenomena such as eclipses or the
return of Halley's comet in 2061 (a Thursday afternoon) and the trajectories
of spacecraft? It is thanks to classical physics that we can design the wings of
airplanes, skyscrapers and bridges able to withstand strong winds and
earthquakes, or robots able to perform high-precision surgery. Why does
everything work so well, if quantum mechanics shows us with great evidence
that the world does not work at all as we thought?
This happens: when huge amounts of atoms join together to form
macroscopic objects, as in the examples we just did (airplanes, bridges and
robots), the disturbing and counterintuitive quantum phenomena, with their
load of uncertainty, seem to erase each other and bring the phenomena back
to the bedrock of the precise predictability of Newtonian physics. The reason
why this happens, in money, is of a statistical nature. When we read that the
average number of members of American families is equal to 2,637
individuals we are faced with a precise and deterministic data. Too bad
however that no family has exactly 2,637 members.
In the 21st century quantum mechanics has become the backbone of all the
research in the atomic and subatomic world, as well as of wide sectors of
material sciences and cosmology. The fruits of the new physics make
thousands of billions of dollars every year, thanks to the electronics industry,
and as many follow from the improvements in efficiency and productivity
made possible by the systematic use of quantum laws. Some physicists a bit
rebellious, however, driven by the cheers of a certain type of philosophers,
still continues to seek a deeper meaning, a principle hidden within quantum
mechanics in which determinism is found. But it is a minority.
Why is quantum physics disturbing, from a psychological point of view?
In a famous passage of a letter to Max Born, Einstein wrote: "You believe
that God plays dice with the world, I believe instead that everything obeys a
law, in a world of objective reality that I try to grasp through furiously
speculative [...] Not even the great initial success of quantum theory manages
to convince me that at the basis of everything there is randomness, although I
know that younger colleagues consider this attitude as an effect of sclerosis. 3
Erwin Schrödinger thought in a similar way: "If I had known that my wave
equation would be used in this way, I would have burned the article before
publishing it [...] I don't like it and I regret having had anything to do with
it".4 What disturbed these eminent figures, so much so that they were forced
to deny their beautiful creation? Let us go into a little detail about these
lamentations, in Einstein's protest against a God who "plays dice". The
turning point of modern quantum theory dates back to 1925, precisely to the
solitary vacation that the young German physicist Werner Heisenberg spent
in Helgoland, a small island in the North Sea where he had retired to find
relief from hay fever. There he had a revolutionary idea.5
In the scientific community there was more and more support for the
hypothesis that atoms were composed of a denser central nucleus surrounded
by a cloud of electrons, similar to planets orbiting the Sun. Heisenberg
examined the behavior of these electrons and realized that for his calculations
it was not necessary to know their precise trajectories around the nucleus.
The particles seemed to jump mysteriously from one orbit to another and at
each jump the atoms emitted light of a certain color (the colors reflect the
frequency of the light waves). From a mathematical point of view,
Heisenberg had been able to find a sensible description of these phenomena,
which however implied a different atom model from that of a tiny solar
system, with planets confined on immutable orbits. In the end he forgot the
calculation of the trajectory of an electron moving from the observed position
A to B, because he realized that any measure of the particle in that time
would necessarily interfere with its behavior. So Heisenberg elaborated a
theory that accounted for the colors of the emitted light, without requiring the
knowledge of the precise trajectory followed by the electron. In the end it
counted only that a certain event was possible and happened with a certain
probability. The uncertainty became an intrinsic feature of the system: the
new reality of quantum physics was born.
Heisenberg's revolutionary solution to the problems posed by a series of
disconcerting experimental data unleashed the fantasy of his mentor, Niels
Bohr, father, grandfather and obstetrician of the new theory. Bohr took the
young colleague's ideas to the extreme, so much so that Heisenberg himself
was initially disturbed. In the end he changed his mind and converted to the
new verb, which many of his eminent colleagues refused to do. Bohr had
reasoned in this way: if to know which path has traveled a certain electron is
not relevant for the calculation of atomic phenomena, then the very idea of
"orbit", of an established trajectory like that of a planet around a star, must be
abandoned because it is meaningless. Everything is reduced to observation
and measurement: the act of measuring forces the system to choose between
the various possibilities. In other words, it is not the uncertainty of
measurement that hides reality; on the contrary, it is reality itself that never
provides certainty in the classical-Galileian sense of the term, when
examining phenomena on an atomic scale.
In quantum physics there seems to be a magical link between the physical
state of a system and its conscious perception by a sentient observer. But it is
the very act of measuring, that is the arrival on the scene of another system,
that resets all but one possibility, making the quantum state "collapse", as
they say, in one of the many alternatives. We will see how much this can be
disturbing later on, when we will meet electrons that are passed one at a time
through two slits in a screen and that form configurations that depend on the
knowledge of the precise slit from which they passed, that is if someone or
something has made a measurement on the system. It seems that a single
electron, as if by magic, crosses the two slits at the same time if nobody is
watching it, while choosing a possible path if someone or something is
watching it! This is possible because electrons are neither particles nor
waves: they are something else, completely new. They have been quantum.6
It is little wonder to discover that many of the pioneers of the new physics,
who had participated in the creation of atomic science, were reluctant to
accept these strange consequences. The best way to gild the pill and get
Heisenberg and Bohr's theses accepted is the so-called "Copenhagen
interpretation. According to this version of the facts, when we measure an
atomic scale system we introduce in the system itself an important
interference, given by the measuring instruments. But whatever interpretation
we give, quantum physics does not correspond to our intuitive ideas of
reality. We must learn to live with it, to play with it, to verify its goodness
with experiments, to imagine theoretical problems that exemplify various
situations, to make it more and more familiar. In this way we could develop a
new "quantum intuition", however contrary to common sense it may seem at
first.
In 1925, completely independent from Heisenberg's ideas, another theoretical
physicist had another fundamental idea, also while he was on vacation (not
alone, however). It was the Viennese Erwin Schrödinger, who had formed a
bond of friendship and scientific collaboration with his colleague Hermann
Weyl. The latter was a mathematician of great value, who had a decisive role
in the development of the relativity theory and in the relativistic version of
the electron theory. Weyl helped Schrödinger with the calculations and as
compensation he could sleep with his wife Anny. We do not know what the
woman thought about the matter, but social experiments of this kind were not
rare in the twilight of the Viennese intellectual society. This agreement also
included the possibility for Schrödinger to embark on a thousand extramarital
adventures, one of which led (in a certain sense) to a great discovery in the
quantum field.7
In December 1925, Schrödinger went on a twenty-day vacation to Arosa, a
village in the Swiss Alps. Leaving Anny at home, he was accompanied by an
old Viennese flame. In her suitcase she also put a scientific article by her
French colleague Louis de Broglie and earplugs. While he was concentrating
on the writing, sheltered from annoying noises (and who knows what the lady
was doing in the meantime), the idea of the so-called "wave mechanics" came
to his mind. It was a new and different way to formalize the emerging
quantum theory in mathematically simpler terms, thanks to equations that
were well known to the main physicists of the time. This revolutionary idea
was of great support for the then fragile quantum theory, which became
known to a much greater number of people.8 The new equation, which in
honor of its discoverer is called "Schrödinger's equation", on one hand
accelerated the path of quantum mechanics, but on the other hand made its
inventor crazy because of the way it was interpreted. It is surprising to read of
Schrödinger's repentance, due to the scientific and philosophical revolution
triggered by his ideas.
The idea was this: to describe the electron with the mathematical tools used
for the waves. This particle, that before was thought to be modelable as a
microscopic ball, in some occasions it behaves just like a wave. The wave
physics (phenomena found in many fields, from water to sound, from light to
radio etc.) was well known at that time. Schrödinger was convinced that a
particle like electron was really a new kind of wave, a "matter wave", so to
speak. It seemed a bisque hypothesis, but the resulting equation was useful in
calculations and gave concrete results in a relatively simple way.
Schrödinger's wave mechanics gave comfort to those sectors of the scientific
community whose members had great difficulty in understanding the
apparently unstoppable quantum theory and who found Heisenberg's version
too abstract for their tastes.
The central point of Schrödinger's idea is the type of solution of the equation
that describes the wave. It is written by convention with the Greek capital
letter psi, Ψ - the so-called "wave function". Ψ is a function in space and time
variables that contains all information about the electron. Schrödinger's
equation, therefore, tells us how the wave function varies as space and time
changes.
Applied to the hydrogen atom, Schrödinger's equation made it possible to
discover the behavior of the electron around the nucleus. The electronic
waves determined by Ψ looked like the sound waves produced by a bell or
some other musical instrument. It is like plucking the strings of a violin or
guitar: the result is vibrations that correspond in a precise and observable way
to various energy levels. Schrödinger equation gave the correct values of
these levels corresponding to the electron oscillations. The data in the
hydrogen atom case had already been determined by Bohr in his first attempt
of theoretical arrangement (that today is called with some sufficiency "old
quantum theory"). The atom emits light with well defined energy levels (the
so called "spectral lines") that thanks to the quantum mechanics today we
know are connected to the electron jumps, that passes from a state of motion
associated to the wave say Ψ2 to the one associated to the wave Ψ1.
Schrödinger's equation proved to be a powerful tool, thanks to which to
determine wave functions through purely mathematical methods. The same
idea could be applied not only to electrons, but to any phenomenon that
required a quantum level treatment: systems consisting of various electrons,
whole atoms, molecules, crystals, conducting metals, protons and neutrons in
the nucleus. Today we have extended the method to all particles composed by
quarks, the fundamental bricks of nuclear matter.
For Schrödinger, electrons were pure and simple waves, similar to marine or
sound waves, and their particle nature could be neglected as illusory. Ψ
represented waves of new type, those of matter. But in the end this
interpretation turned out to be wrong. What was Ψ really about? After all,
electrons continued to behave as if they were point particles, which for
example you could see when they collided with a fluorescent screen. How
was this behavior reconciled with the undulatory nature?
Another German physicist, Max Born (who by the way was an ancestor of
the singer Olivia Newton-John), proposed a new interpretation of
Schrödinger's equation that remains today a cornerstone of physics.
According to him, the wave associated to the electron was a so-called
"probability wave".10 To be precise, the square of Ψ(x, t), that is Ψ2(x, t),
was the probability to find the electron in the x point at time t. Where the
value of Ψ2 is high, there is a strong probability to find the electron. Where
Ψ2=0, instead, there is no possibility. It was a shocking proposal, similar to
Heisenberg's one, but it had the merit to be easier to understand, because it
was formulated in the most familiar ground of Schrödinger equation. Almost
everyone was convinced and the question seemed to be closed.
Born's hypothesis clearly states that we do not know and we will never be
able to know where the electron is. Is it maybe there? Mah, there is an 85
percent probability that it is so. Is it on the other side? We cannot exclude it,
there is a 15% probability. Born's interpretation defines also without
hesitation what can or cannot be predicted in the experiments, and it does not
exclude the case that two apparently identical tests give very different results.
It seems that particles can afford the luxury of being where they are at a
certain time without obeying those strict rules of causal type that are usually
associated with classical physics. There is nothing to do, for quantum theory
it seems that God is playing dice with the universe.
Schrödinger was not happy to have been a protagonist of that disturbing
revolution. Together with Einstein, who ironically wrote an article in 1911
that gave Born the inspiration for his idea, he remained in the field of
dissidents all his life. Another "passerby" was the great Max Planck, who
wrote: "The probabilistic interpretation proposed by the Copenhagen group
must be condemned without fault, for high treason against our beloved
physicist".11
Planck was one of the greatest theoretical physicists active at the turn of the
century, and even he did not like the fold that quantum theory had taken. It
was the supreme paradox, since he had been the true founder of the new
physics, besides having coined the term "how much" already at the end of the
nineteenth century.
We can perhaps understand the scientist that speaks of "betrayal" about the
entry of the probability in the physical laws instead of the solid certainties of
cause and effect. Let's imagine having a normal tennis ball and bouncing it
against a smooth concrete wall. We do not move from the point where we
threw it and continue to hit it with the same force and aiming in the same
direction. Under the same boundary conditions (such as wind), a good tennis
player should be able to get the ball in exactly the same place, shot after shot,
until he gets tired or the ball (or the wall) breaks. A champion like Andre
Agassi counted on these characteristics of the physical world to develop in
training the skills that allowed him to win Wimbledon. But what would
happen if the rebound was not predictable? Or if even on some occasion the
ball was able to cross the wall? What if only the probability of the
phenomenon is known? For example, fifty-five times out of a hundred the
ball goes back, the other forty-five times it goes through the wall. And so on,
for everything: there is also a probability that it will cross the barrier formed
by the racket. We know that this never happens in the macroscopic and
Newtonian world of tennis tournaments. But at the atomic level everything
changes. An electron shot against the equivalent of a particle wall has a
probability different from zero to cross it, thanks to a property known as
"tunnel effect". Imagine what kind of difficulties and frustrations would meet
a tennis player engaged in the subatomic world.
There are cases, however, where the non-deterministic behavior is observable
in everyday reality, especially that of photons. You are looking at the window
of a store window full of sexy underwear, and you realize that a faded image
of yourself has formed on the dummy's shoes. Why is that? The phenomenon
is due to the nature of light, a stream of particles (photons, in fact) with
bizarre quantum properties. The photons, which we suppose come from the
Sun, mostly bounce on your face, go through the glass and show a clear
image of you (but you are not bad) to the person inside the store (maybe the
window dresser who is dressing the mannequin). But a small part of the
photons is reflected by the glass and gives your eyes the faint portrait of your
face lost in the contemplation of those microscopic clothes. But how is this
possible, since all the photons are identical?
Even with the most sophisticated experiments, there is no way to predict what
will happen to the photons. We are given to know only the probability of the
event: applying Schrödinger's equation, we can calculate that the luminous
particles pass through the window 96 times out of 100 and bounce back the
remaining 4 times. Are we able to know what the single photon does? No, in
no way, not even with the best tools imaginable. God rolls the dice every
time to decide where to pass the particle, or so quantum physics tells us
(maybe he prefers roulette... anyway, it is clear that he plays with
probabilities).
To replicate the showcase situation in an experimental context (and much
more expensive), we shoot electrons against a barrier constituted by a grid of
conductive wires inside a container where the vacuum is made, connected to
the negative pole of a battery with voltage equal, for example, to 10 volts. An
electron with energy equivalent to a potential of 9 volt should be reflected,
because it cannot counter the repulsive force of the barrier. But Schrödinger's
equation tells us that a part of the wave associated to the electron is still able
to pass through it, just as it happened to photons with glass. But in our
experience there are no "fractions" of photon or electron: these particles are
not made of plasticine and you cannot detach pieces of them at will. So the
final result must always be only one, that is reflection or crossing. If the
calculations tell us that the first eventuality occurs in 20 percent of the cases,
this means that all the electron or photon is reflected with 20 percent
probability. We know this thanks to Schrödinger's equation, which gives us
the result in terms of Ψ2.
It was with the help of analogous experiments that physicists abandoned the
original Schrödinger's interpretation, that was to say that it provided
"plasticine" electrons, i.e. matter waves, to arrive to the probabilistic one,
much less intuitive, according to which a certain mathematical function, Ψ2,
provided the probability to find the particles in a certain position at a given
instant. If we shoot a thousand electrons against a screen and check with a
Geiger counter how many of them pass it, we find maybe that 568 have
passed and 432 have been reflected. Which of them was this fate? There is no
way to know, neither now nor ever. This is the frustrating reality of quantum
physics. All we can do is calculate the probability of the event, Ψ2.
.
Schrödinger had a kitten
In examining the philosophical paradoxes brought by quantum theory we
cannot overlook the now famous case of Schrödinger's cat, in which the
funny microscopic world with its probabilistic laws is linked to the
macroscopic one with its precise Newtonian pronouncements. Like Einstein,
Podolsky and Rosen, Schrödinger did not want to accept the fact that
objective reality did not exist before observation, but was in a jumble of
possible states. His cat paradox was originally intended as a way of mocking
a worldview that was untenable for him, but it has proved to be one of the
most tenacious nightmares of modern science to this day. This too, like EPR,
is a mental or conceptual experiment, designed to make quantum effects
resoundingly manifest even in the macroscopic field. And also this makes use
of radioactivity, a phenomenon that involves the decay of matter according to
a predictable rate, but without knowing exactly when the single particle will
disintegrate (that is, as we have seen above, we can say how many particles
will decay in an hour, for example, but not when one of them will).
Here is the situation imagined by Schrödinger. We close a cat inside a box
together with a vial containing a poisonous gas. On the other hand, we put a
small well sealed amount of radioactive material, so that we have a 50%
chance of observing a single decay in the space of one hour. Let's invent
some kind of device that connects the Geiger counter that detects the decay to
a switch, which in turn activates a hammer, which in turn hits the vial, thus
releasing the gas and killing the cat (of course these Viennese intellectuals of
the early twentieth century were very strange...).
Let an hour pass and ask ourselves: is the cat alive or dead? If we describe
the system with a wave function, we get a "mixed" state15 like the one seen
above, in which the cat is "smeared" (we apologize to cat lovers) in equal
parts between life and death. In symbols we could write Ψgatto-vivo +
Ψgatto-morto. At macroscopic level, we can only calculate the probability of
finding the cat alive, equal to (Ψgatto-vivo)2, and that of finding it dead,
equal to (Ψgatto-morto)2.
But here is the dilemma: the collapse of the initial quantum state in the "live
cat" or "dead cat" is determined by the moment someone (or something)
peeks inside the box? Couldn't the cat itself, who observes the Geiger counter
distressed, be the entity capable of the measurement? Or, if we want a deeper
identity crisis: the radioactive decay could be monitored by a computer,
which at any time is able to print the state of the cat on a sheet of paper inside
the box. When the computer records the arrival of the particle, is the cat
definitely alive or dead? or is it when the printing of the state is finished? or
when a human observer reads it? or when the flow of electrons produced by
the decay meets a sensor inside the Geiger counter that triggers it, that is
when we move from the subatomic world to the macroscopic one?
Schrödinger's cat paradox, like the EPR one, seems at first sight a strong
refutation of the fundamental principles of quantum physics. It is clear that
the cat cannot be in a "mixed" state, half alive and half dead. Or not?
As we will see better later, some experiments have shown that Schrödinger's
visible cat, representative of all macroscopic systems, can really be in a
mixed state; in other words, quantum theory implies the existence of these
situations also at macroscopic level. Another victory for the new physics.
Quantum effects, indeed, can occur at various scales, from the smallest of
atoms to the largest of systems. An example is given by the so-called
"superconductivity", so that at very low temperatures certain materials have
no electrical resistance and allow the current to circulate infinitely without
the help of batteries, and the magnets to remain suspended above the circuits
forever. The same goes for "superfluidity", a state of matter in which, for
example, a flow of liquid helium can rise up the walls of a test tube or feed
perpetual fountains, without consuming energy. And the same is also true for
the mysterious phenomenon thanks to which all particles acquire mass, the
so-called "Higgs mechanism". There is no way to escape quantum
mechanics: in the end, we are all cats locked in some box.
No math, promised, but just a few numbers
With this book we would like to give you an idea of the tools that physics has
developed to try to understand the strange microscopic world inhabited by
atoms and molecules. We ask readers only two small efforts: to have a
healthy sense of curiosity about the world and to master the advanced
techniques for solving differential equations with partial derivatives. All
right, we joked. After years of giving elementary physics courses to students
of non-scientific faculties, we know how widespread the terror of
mathematics is among the population. No formulas, then, or at least the
minimum necessary, few and scattered here and there.
The scientific vision of the world should be taught to everyone. Quantum
mechanics, in particular, is the most radical change of perspective occurred in
human thought since the ancient Greeks began to abandon the myth in favor
of the search for rational principles in the universe. Thanks to the new theory,
our understanding of the world has greatly expanded. The price paid by
modern science for this broadening of intellectual horizons has been the
acceptance of many apparently counterintuitive ideas. But remember that the
blame for this falls mainly on the shoulders of our old Newtonian language,
unable to accurately describe the atomic world. As scientists, we promise to
do our best.
Since we are about to enter the realm of the infinitely small, it is convenient
for us to use the convenient notation of the "powers of ten". Do not be
frightened by this scientific shorthand that we will sometimes use in the
book: it is just a method to effortlessly record very large or very small
numbers. If you see written for example 104 ("ten high to the fourth power",
or "ten to the fourth"), all you have to do is translate it "one followed by four
zeros": 104=10000. On the contrary, 10-4 indicates "one preceded by four
zeros", one of which must obviously be before the comma: 10-4=0.0001, that
is 1/10000, one ten thousandth.
Using this simple language, let's see how to express the scales at which
various natural phenomena occur, in descending order.
- 100 m=1 m, that is one meter: it is the typical human scale, equal to the
height of a child, the length of an arm or a step;
- 10-2 m=1 cm, that is one centimeter: it is the width of an inch, the length of
a bee or a hazelnut.
- 10-4 m, a tenth of a millimeter: is the thickness of a pin or the legs of an
ant; so far we are always in the domain of application of classical Newtonian
physics.
- 10-6 m, one micron or millionth of a meter: we are at the level of the largest
molecules found in the cells of organisms, such as DNA; we are also at the
wavelength of visible light; here we begin to feel the quantum effects.
- 10-9 m, one nanometer or billionth of a meter: it is the diameter of a golden
atom; the smallest among the atoms, the hydrogen one, has a diameter of 10-
10 m.
- 10-15 m: we are in the parts of atomic nucleus; protons and neutrons have a
diameter of 10-16 m, and under this length we find quarks.
- 10-19 m: it is the smallest scale that can be observed with the most powerful
particle accelerator in the world, the LHC of CERN in Geneva.
- 10-35 m: is the smallest scale that we believe exists, under which the very
idea of "distance" loses its meaning due to quantum effects.
The experimental data tell us that quantum mechanics is valid and
fundamental for the understanding of phenomena from 10-9 to 10-15 meters,
i.e. from atoms to nuclei (in words: from one billionth to one millionth of one
billionth of a meter). In some recent researches, thanks to the Tevatron of
Fermilab, we have been able to probe distances of the order of 10-18 meters
and we have not seen anything that convinced us of the failure at that scale of
quantum mechanics. Soon we will penetrate into territories smaller by a
factor of ten, thanks to the colossal LHC, the CERN accelerator that is about
to start working.* The exploration of these new worlds is not similar to the
geographical one, to the discovery of a new continent previously unknown. It
is rather an investigation within our world, because the universe is formed by
the collection of all the inhabitants of the microscopic domain. On its
properties, and their consequences, our future depends.
Why do we need a "theory"?
Some of you may ask yourselves if it is worth the effort for a simple theory.
Well, there are theories and theories, and it is the fault of us scientists who
use the same word to indicate very different contexts. In itself, a "theory" is
not even well defined from a scientific point of view.
Let's make an example a bit banal. A population living on the shores of the
Atlantic Ocean notices that the Sun rises on the horizon every morning at 5
a.m. and sets in the opposite direction every night at 7 p.m. To explain this
phenomenon, a venerable wise man puts forward a theory: there are an
infinite number of suns hidden under the horizon, which appear every 24
hours. There is, however, a hypothesis that requires less resources: only one
Sun revolving around the Earth, supposedly spherical, in 24 hours. A third
theory, the most bizarre and counterintuitive, argues instead that the Sun
stands still and the Earth turns on itself in 24 hours. We have therefore three
ideas in conflict between them. In this case the word "theory" implies the
presence of a hypothesis that explains in a rational and systematic way why
what we observe happens.
The first theory is easily refuted, for many good reasons (or simply because it
is idiotic). More difficult is to get rid of the second one; for example you
could observe that the other planets in the sky rotate on themselves, so by
analogy the Earth should do it too. Be that as it may, in the end thanks to
accurate experimental measurements we verify that it is our world that is
rotating. So only one theory survives, which we will call axial rotation or RA.
Here is a problem, however: in all the previous discussion we have never
talked about "truth" or "facts", but only "theories". We know very well that
the RA is centuries old, and yet we still call it "Copernican theory", even if
we are sure that it is true, that it is an established fact. In reality we want to
emphasize the fact that the RA hypothesis is the best, in the sense that it
better fits with the observations and tests, very different and even performed
in extreme circumstances. Until we have a better explanation, we keep this
one. Yet we continue to call it theory. Perhaps because we have seen in the
past that ideas taken for granted in some areas have required changes in the
transition to different areas.
So today we talk about "theory of relativity", "quantum theory", "theory of
electromagnetism", "Darwinian theory of evolution" and so on, even if we
know that all these have reached a higher degree of credibility and scientific
acceptance. Their explanations of the various phenomena are valid and are
considered as "factual truths" in their respective domains of application.
There are also theories proposed but not verified, such as that of strings,
which seem excellent attempts, but could be accepted as rejected. And there
are theories definitively abandoned, like that of the phlogiston (a mysterious
fluid responsible for combustion) and the caloric (an equally mysterious fluid
responsible for heat transmission). Today, however, quantum theory is the
best verified among all the scientific theories ever proposed. Let's accept it as
a fact: it is a fact.
Enough with the intuitive, hurray for the counterintuitive
As we approach the new atomic territories, everything that intuition suggests
becomes suspicious and the information accumulated so far may no longer be
useful to us. Everyday life takes place within a very limited range of
experiences. We do not know, for example, what it feels like to travel a
million times faster than a bullet, or to endure temperatures of billions of
degrees; nor have we ever danced in the full moon with an atom or a nucleus.
Science, however, has compensated for our limited direct experience of
nature and made us aware of how big and full of different things the world
out there is. To use the metaphor dear to a colleague of ours, we are like
chicken embryos that feed on what they find in the egg until the food is
finished, and it seems that our world must end too; but at that point we try to
give the shell a shot, we go out and discover an immensely larger and more
interesting universe.
Among the various intuitions typical of an adult human being there is the one
that the objects that surround us, whether they are chairs, lamps or cats, exist
independently from us and have certain objective properties. We also believe,
based on what we study in school, that if we repeat an experiment at various
times (for example if we let two different cars run along a ramp) we should
always get the same results. It is also obvious, intuitive, that a tennis ball
passing from one half of the court to the other has a defined position and
speed at all times. It is enough to film the event, i.e. obtain a collection of
snapshots, to know the situation at various moments - and to reconstruct the
overall trajectory of the ball.
These intuitions continue to help us in the macroscopic world, between
machines and balls, but as we have already seen (and we will see again in the
course of the book), if we go down to the atomic level we see strange things
happening, which force us to abandon the preconceptions dear to us: prepare
to leave your intuitions at the entrance, dear readers. The history of science is
a history of revolutions, but they do not throw away all previous knowledge.
Newton's work, for example, understood and extended (without destroying
them) the previous research of Galileo, Kepler and Copernicus. James Clerk
Maxwell, inventor of the theory of electromagnetism in the nineteenth
century,17 took the results of Newton and used them to extend certain aspects
of the theory to other fields. The Einsteinian relativity incorporated Newton's
physics and extended the domain until to understand cases in which the speed
is very high or the space very extended, fields in which the new equations are
valid (while the old ones remain valid in the other cases). Quantum
mechanics started from Newton and Maxwell to arrive to a coherent theory of
atomic phenomena. In all these cases, the passage to the new theories was
done, at least at the beginning, using the language of the old ones; but with
quantum mechanics we see the failure of the classical language of the
previous physics, as well as of the natural human languages.
Einstein and his dissident colleagues were faced with our own difficulty, that
is, to understand the new atomic physics through the vocabulary and
philosophy of macroscopic objects. We have to learn to understand that the
world of Newton and Maxwell finds itself as a consequence of the new
theory, which is expressed in the quantum language. If we were also as big as
atoms, we would have grown up surrounded by phenomena that would be
familiar to us; and maybe one day an alien as big as a quark would ask us:
"What kind of world do you think we get if we put together 1023 atoms and
form an object that I call "ball"?
Perhaps it is the concepts of probability and indeterminacy that challenge our
linguistic abilities. This is no small problem that remains in our day and
frustrates even great minds. It is said that the famous theoretical physicist
Richard Feynman refused to answer a journalist who, during an interview,
asked him to explain to the public what force was acting between two
magnets, claiming that it was an impossible task. Later, when asked for
clarification, he said it was because of intuitive preconceptions. The journalist
and a large part of the audience understand "force" as what we feel if we
reward
the palm of your hand against the table. This is their world, and their
language. But in reality in the act of supporting the hand are involved
electromagnetic forces, the cohesion of matter, quantum mechanics - it is
very complicated. It was not possible to explain the pure magnetic force in
familiar terms to the inhabitants of the "old world".
As we will see, to understand quantum theory we must enter a new world. It
is certainly the most important fruit of the scientific explorations of the
twentieth century, and it will be essential for the whole new century. It is not
right to let only professionals enjoy it.
Even today, at the beginning of the second decade of the 21st century, some
illustrious scientists continue to search with great effort for a more "friendly"
version of quantum mechanics that less disturb our common sense. But these
efforts so far do not seem to lead to anything. Other scientists simply learn
the rules of the quantum world and make progress, even important ones, for
example adapting them to new principles of symmetry, using them to
hypothesize a world where strings and membranes replace elementary
particles, or imagining what happens at scales billions of times smaller than
those we have reached so far with our instruments. This last line of research
seems the most promising and could give us an idea of what could unify the
various forces and the very structure of space and time.
Our aim is to make you appreciate the disturbing strangeness of quantum
theory, but above all the profound consequences it has on our understanding
of the world. For our part, we think that the uneasiness is mainly due to our
prejudices. Nature speaks in a different language, which we must learn - just
as it would be good to read Camus in the original French and not in a
translation full of American slang. If a few steps gives us a hard time, let's
take a nice vacation in Provence and breathe the air of France, rather than
stay in our house in the suburbs and try to adapt the language we use every
day to that very different world. In the next chapters we will try to transport
you to a place that is part of our universe and at the same time goes beyond
imagination, and in the next chapters we will also teach you the language to
understand the new world.
Chapter 2
The beginning



A complicating factor
    efore trying to understand the dizzying quantum universe, it is necessary
B   to familiarize oneself with some aspects of the scientific theories that
    preceded it, that is, with the so-called classical physics. This body of
knowledge is the culmination of centuries of research, begun even before
Galileo's time and completed by geniuses such as Isaac Newton, Michael
Faraday, James Clerk Maxwell, Heinrich Hertz and many others.2 Classical
physics, which reigned unchallenged until the early 20th century, is based on
the idea of a clockwork universe: ordered, predictable, governed by causal
laws.
To have an example of a counterintuitive idea, let us take our Earth, which
from our typical point of view appears solid, immutable, eternal. We are able
to balance a tray full of cups of coffee without spilling a drop, yet our planet
spins fast on itself. All the objects on its surface, far from being at rest, spin
with it like the passengers of a colossal carousel. At the Equator, the Earth
speeds faster than a jet, at over 1600 kilometers per hour; moreover, it runs
wildly around the Sun at an incredible average speed of 108,000 kilometers
per hour. And on top of that, the entire solar system, including the Earth,
travels the galaxy at even higher speeds. Yet we do not realize it, we do not
feel like we are running. We see the Sun rising in the east and setting in the
west, and nothing more. How is this possible? Writing a letter while riding a
horse or driving a car at 100 km/h on the highway is a very difficult task, yet
we have all seen footage of astronauts doing precision work inside an
orbiting station, launched around our planet at almost 30,000 kilometers per
hour. If it weren't for the blue globe changing shape in the background, those
men floating in space seem to be standing still.
Intuition, in general, does not notice if what surrounds us is moving at the
same speed as us, and if the motion is uniform and not accelerated we do not
feel any sensation of displacement. The Greeks believed that there was a state
of absolute rest, relative to the surface of the Earth. Galileo questioned this
venerable Aristotelian idea and replaced it with a more scientific one: for
physics there is no difference between standing still and moving with
constant (even approximate) direction and speed. From their point of view,
astronauts are standing still; seen from Earth, they are circling us at a crazy
speed of 28 800 kilometers per hour.
Galileo's sharpened ingenuity easily understood that two bodies of different
weights fall at the same speed and reach the ground at the same time. For
almost all his contemporaries, however, it was anything but obvious, because
daily experience seemed to say otherwise. But the scientist did the right
experiments to prove his thesis and also found a rational justification: it was
the resistance of the air that shuffled the cards. For Galileo this was only a
complicating factor, which hid the deep underlying simplicity of natural laws.
Without air between the feet, all bodies fall with the same speed, from the
feather to the colossal rock.
It was then discovered that the gravitational attraction of the Earth, which is a
force, depends on the mass of the falling object, where mass is a measure of
the amount of matter contained in the object itself.
The weight, instead, is the force exerted by gravity on bodies endowed with
mass (perhaps you will remember that the physics teacher in high school
repeated: "If you transport an object on the Moon, its mass remains the same,
while the weight is reduced". Today all this is clear to us thanks to the work
of men like Galileo). The force of gravity is directly proportional to the mass:
you double the mass and the force is also doubled. At the same time,
however, as the mass grows, so does the resistance to change the state of
motion. These two equal and opposite effects cancel each other out and so it
happens that all bodies fall to the ground with the same speed - as usual
neglecting that complicating factor of friction.
To the philosophers of ancient Greece the state of rest seemed obviously the
most natural for bodies, to which they all tend. If we kick a ball, sooner or
later it stops; if we run out of fuel in a car, it stops too; the same happens to a
disc slid on a table. All this is perfectly sensible and also perfectly
Aristotelian (this of Aristotelianism must be our innate instinct).
But Galileo had deeper ideas. He realized, in fact, that by hinging the surface
of the table and smoothing the puck, it would continue to run for a much
longer time; we can verify this, for example, by sliding a field hockey puck
over an icy lake. Let's remove all friction and other complicating factors, and
see that the puck continues to slide infinitely along a straight trajectory at
uniform speed. This is what causes the end of the motion, Galileo said: the
friction between puck and table (or between car and road), that is a
complicating factor.
Usually in the physics labs there is a long metal rail with numerous small
holes through which air passes. In this way a trolley placed on the rail, the
equivalent of our disk, can move floating on an air cushion. At the ends of the
track there are rubber buffers. A small initial push is enough and the trolley
starts bouncing non-stop between the two ends, back and forth, sometimes for
the whole hour. It seems animated with its own life, how is it possible? The
show is amusing because it goes against common sense, but in reality it is a
manifestation of a profound principle of physics, which manifests itself when
we remove the complication of friction. Thanks to less technological but
equally enlightening experiments, Galileo discovered a new law of nature,
which reads: "An isolated body in motion maintains its state of motion
forever. By "isolated" we mean that no friction, various forces or anything
else act on it. Only the application of a force can change a state of motion.
It is counterintuitive, isn't it? Yes, because it is very difficult to imagine a
truly isolated body, a mythological creature that you do not encounter at
home, in the park or anywhere else on Earth. We can only approach this ideal
situation in the laboratory, with equipment designed as needed. But after
witnessing some other version of the air track experiment, usually first year
physics students end up taking the principle for granted.
The scientific method involves careful observation of the world. One of the
cornerstones of its success in the last four centuries is its ability to create
abstract models, to refer to an ideal universe in our mind, devoid of the
complications of the real one, where we can hunt for the laws of nature.
Having achieved a result in this world, we can go on the attack of the other,
the more complicated one, after having quantified complication factors such
as friction.
Let's move on to another important example. The solar system is actually
intricate. There is a big star in the center, the Sun, and there are nine (or
rather eight, after the downgrading of Pluto) smaller bodies of various masses
around it; the planets in turn may have satellites. All these bodies attract each
other and move according to a complex choreography. To simplify the
situation, Newton reduced everything to an ideal model: a star and a single
planet. How would these two bodies behave?
This research method is called "reductionist". Take a complex system (eight
planets and the Sun) and consider a more treatable subset of it (one planet
and the Sun). Now maybe the problem can be faced (in this case yes). Solve
it and try to understand what characteristics of the solution are preserved in
the return to the starting complex system (in this case we see that each planet
behaves practically as if it were alone, with minimal corrections due to the
attraction between the planets themselves).
The reductionism is not always applicable and does not always work. That is
why we still do not have a precise description of objects like tornadoes or the
turbulent flow of a fluid, not to mention the complex phenomena at the level
of molecules and living organisms. The method proves useful when the ideal
model does not deviate too much from its ugly and chaotic version, the one
we live in. In the case of the solar system, the mass of the star is so much
greater than that of the planets that it is possible to overlook the attraction of
Mars, Venus, Jupiter and company when we study the motions of the Earth:
the star + planet system provides an acceptable description of the Earth
motions. And as we become familiar with this method, we can go back to the
real world and make an extra effort to try to take into account the next
complication factor in order of importance.
The parabola and the pendulum
Classical physics, or pre-quantistic physics, is based on two cornerstones.
The first is the Galilean-Newtonian mechanics, invented in the seventeenth
century. The second is given by the laws of electricity, magnetism and optics,
discovered in the nineteenth century by a group of scientists whose names,
who knows why, all remember some units of physical magnitude: Coulomb,
Ørsted, Ohm, Ampère, Faraday and Maxwell. Let's start with Newton's
masterpiece, the continuation of the work of our hero Galileo.
The bodies left free fall, with a speed that increases with the passage of time
according to a fixed value (the rate of variation of the speed is called
acceleration). A bullet, a tennis ball, a cannonball all describe in their motion
an arc of supreme mathematical elegance, tracing a curve called parabola. A
pendulum, that is, a body tied to a hanging wire (like a swing made by a tire
tied to a branch, or an old clock), oscillates with a remarkable regularity, so
that (precisely) you can adjust the clock. Sun and Moon attract the waters of
the terrestrial seas and create tides. These and other phenomena can be
explained rationally by Newton's laws of motion.
His creative explosion, which has few equals in the history of human thought,
led him in a short time to two great discoveries. In order to describe them
precisely and compare his predictions with data, he used a particular
mathematical language called infinitesimal calculus, which for the most part
he had to invent from scratch. The first discovery, usually labeled as "the
three laws of motion", is used to calculate the motions of bodies once known
the forces acting on them (Newton could have boasted so: "Give me the
forces and a computer powerful enough and I'll tell you what will happen in
the future. But it seems he never said it).
The forces acting on a body can be exercised in a thousand ways: through
ropes, sticks, human muscles, wind, water pressure, magnets and so on. A
particular natural force, gravity, was at the center of Newton's second great
discovery. Describing the phenomenon with an equation of astonishing
simplicity, he established that all objects endowed with mass attract each
other and that the value of the force of attraction decreases as the distance
between the objects increases, in this way: if the distance doubles, the force is
reduced by a quarter; if it triples, by a ninth; and so on. It is the famous "law
of the inverse of the square", thanks to which we know that we can make the
value of the force of gravity small at will, simply by moving away enough.
For example, the attraction exerted on a human being by Alpha Centauri, one
of the nearest stars (only four light years from here), is equal to one ten
thousandth of a billionth, that is 10-13, of that exerted by the Earth. Vice
versa, if we approach an object of great mass, like a neutron star, the resulting
gravity force would crush us to the size of an atomic nucleus. Newton's laws
describe the action of gravity on everything: apples falling from trees, bullets,
pendulums and other objects located on the Earth's surface, where we almost
all spend our existence. But they also apply in the vastness of space, for
example between the Earth and the Sun, which are on average 150 million
kilometers away.
Are we sure, however, that these laws are still valid outside our planet? A
theory is valid if it provides values according to the experimental data (taking
into account the inevitable measurement errors). Think a little bit: the
evidence shows that Newton's laws work well in the solar system. With very
good approximation, the single planets can be studied thanks to the
simplification seen above, i.e. neglecting the effects of the others and taking
into account the Sun and that's it. Newtonian theory predicts that the planets
rotate around our star following perfectly elliptical orbits. But examining well
the data we realize that there are small discrepancies in the case of Mars,
whose orbit is not exactly the one provided by the "two bodies"
approximation.
In studying the Sun-Mars system, we neglect the effects (relatively small) on
the red planet of bodies like Earth, Venus, Jupiter and so on. The latter, in
particular, is very large and gives some nice bang to Mars every time the
orbits approach. In the long run, these effects add up. It is not excluded that
in a few billion years Mars will be kicked out of the solar system as the
competitor of a reality show. So we realize that the problem of planetary
motions becomes more complex if we consider long time intervals. But
thanks to modern computers we can face these small (and not so small)
perturbations - including those due to Einstein's theory of general relativity,
which is the modern version of Newtonian gravitation. With the right
corrections, we see that the theory is always in perfect agreement with the
experimental data. What can we say, however, when even greater distances
come into play, such as those between the stars? The most modern
astronomical measurements tell us that the force of gravity is present
throughout the cosmos and for what we know it is valid everywhere.
Let's take a moment to contemplate a list of phenomena that take place
according to Newtonian laws. Apples fall down from the trees, actually
heading towards the center of the Earth. Artillery bullets sow destruction
following parabola arches. The Moon looms only 384 000 kilometers from us
and is the cause of tides and romantic languor. The planets whizz around the
Sun along orbits that are not very elliptical, almost circular. Comets, on the
other hand, follow very elliptical trajectories and take hundreds or thousands
of years to make a turn and return to show themselves. From the smallest to
the largest, the ingredients of the universe behave in perfectly predictable
ways, following the laws discovered by Sir Isaac.
Chapter 3
What is light?




B efore we leave classical physics behind us, we have to spend a few
  minutes talking about light and playing with it, because it will be the
     protagonist of many important (and at first puzzling) issues when we start
to enter the quantum world. So we will now take a historical look at the
theory of light in the classical world.1
Light is a form of energy. It can be produced in various ways, transforming
electrical energy (as seen for example in a light bulb, or in the redness of
toaster resistances) or chemical energy (as in candles and combustion
processes in general). The sunlight, a consequence of the high temperatures
present on the surface of our star, comes from nuclear fusion processes that
take place inside it. And also the radioactive particles produced by a nuclear
reactor here on Earth emit a blue light when they enter the water (which
ionize, i.e. tear electrons from atoms).
It only takes a small amount of energy put into any substance to heat it. At
small scales, this can be felt as a moderate temperature increase (as well
knows also those who dabble with DIY on weekends, nails get warm after a
series of hammering, or if they are torn from the wood with pliers). If we
supply enough energy to a piece of iron, it begins to emit light radiation;
initially it is reddish in color, then as the temperature increases we see
orange, yellow, green and blue tones appear in order. At the end, if the heat is
high enough, the emitted light becomes white, the result of the sum of all
colors.
Most of the bodies around us, however, are visible not because they emit
light, but because they reflect it. Excluding the case of mirrors, the reflection
is always imperfect, not total: a red object appears to us as such because it
reflects only this component of the light and absorbs orange, green, violet and
so on. The pigments of paints are chemical substances that have the property
of accurately reflecting certain colors, with a selective mechanism. White
objects, on the other hand, reflect all the components of light, while black
ones absorb them all: this is why the dark asphalt of a parking lot becomes
hot on summer days, and this is the reason why in the tropics it is better to
dress in light-colored clothing. These phenomena of absorption, reflection
and heating, in relation to the various colors, have properties that can be
measured and quantified by various scientific instruments.
Light is full of oddities. Here you are, we see you because the light rays
reflected from your body affect our eyes. How interesting! Our mutual friend
Edward is observing the piano instead: the rays of the you-us interaction
(normally invisible, except when we are in a dusty or smoky room) intersect
with those of the Edward-piano interaction without any apparent interference.
But if we concentrate on an object the beams produced by two flashlights, we
realize that the intensity of the lighting doubles, so there is interaction
between the light rays.
Let us now examine the goldfish tank. We turn off the light in the room and
turn on a flashlight. Helping ourselves with some dust suspended in the air,
maybe produced by banging two blackboard erasers or a dust rag, we see that
the light rays bend when they hit the water (and also that the poor little fish is
looking at us perplexed, hopefully waiting for the feed). This phenomenon
whereby transparent substances such as glass deflect light is called refraction.
When the Boy Scouts light a fire by concentrating the sun's rays on a little
dry wood through a lens, they are taking advantage of this property: the lens
bends all the light rays making them concentrate in a point called "fire", and
this increases the amount of energy until it is so high that it triggers the
combustion.
A glass prism is able to decompose light into its components, the so-called
"spectrum". These correspond to the colors of the rainbow: red, orange,
yellow, green, blue, indigo and violet (to memorize the order remember the
initials RAGVAIV). Our eyes react to this type of light, called "visible", but
we know that there are also invisible types. On one side of the spectrum there
is the so-called "infrared" long wave range (of this type, for example, is the
radiation produced by certain heaters, the toaster resistances or the embers of
a dying fire); on the other side there are the "ultraviolet" rays, short wave (an
example is the radiation emitted by an arc welding machine, and that is why
those who use it must wear protective glasses). The white light, therefore, is a
mixture of various colors in equal parts. With special instruments we are able
to quantify the characteristics of each color band, more properly their
wavelength, and report the results on a graph. By subjecting any light source
to this measurement, we find that the graph assumes a bell shape (see Fig. 4.1
below), whose peak is at a certain wavelength (i.e. color). At low
temperatures the peak corresponds to long waves, i.e. red light. Increasing the
heat, the maximum of the curve moves to the right, where the short waves
are, i.e. violet light, but up to certain temperature values the amount of other
colors is sufficient to ensure that the emitted light remains white. After these
thresholds, the objects emit blue glow. If you look at the sky on a clear night,
you will notice that the stars shine with slightly different colors: those
tending to reddish are colder than white ones, which in turn are colder than
blue ones. These gradations correspond to different stages of evolution in the
life of the stars, as they consume their nuclear fuel. This simple identity card
of light was the starting point of quantum theory, as we will see in more
detail in a little while.
How fast does light travel?
The fact that light is an entity that "travels" in space, for example from a light
bulb to our retina, is not entirely intuitive. In the eyes of a child, light is
something that shines, not that moves. But that's just the way it is. Galileo
was one of the first to try to measure its speed, with the help of two assistants
placed on top of two nearby hills who spent the night covering and
discovering two lanterns at predetermined times. When they saw the other
light, they had to communicate it aloud to an external observer (Galileo
himself), who made his measurements by moving at various distances from
the two sources. It is an excellent way to measure the speed of sound,
according to the same principle that a certain amount of time elapses between
seeing lightning and hearing thunder. The sound is not very fast, it goes at
about 1200 per hour (or 330 meters per second), so the effect is perceivable
to the naked eye: for example, it takes 3 seconds before the thunderbolt
comes from a lightning bolt that falls one kilometer away. But Galileo's
simple experiment was not suitable to measure the speed of light, which is
enormously higher.
In 1676 a Danish astronomer named Ole Römer, who at the time worked at
the Paris Observatory, pointed his telescope towards the then known Jupiter
satellites (called "Galileans" or "Medici" because they were discovered by the
usual Galileo less than a century earlier and dedicated by him to Cosimo de'
Medici). 2 He focused on their eclipses and noticed a delay with which the
moons disappeared and reappeared behind the big planet; this small time
interval depended mysteriously on the distance between Earth and Jupiter,
which changes during the year (for example Ganymede seemed to be early in
December and late in July). Römer understood that the effect was due to the
finite speed of light, according to a principle similar to that of the delay
between thunder and lightning.
In 1685 the first reliable data on the distance between the two planets became
available, which combined with the precise observations of Römer allowed to
calculate the speed of light: it resulted an impressive value of 300000
kilometers per second, immensely greater than that of sound. In 1850
Armand Fizeau and Jean Foucault, two skilled French experimenters in fierce
competition with each other, were the first to calculate this speed with direct
methods, on Earth, without resorting to astronomical measurements. It was
the beginning of a chase race between various scientists in search of the most
precise value possible, which continues to this day. The most accredited
today, which in physics is indicated by the letter c, is equal to 299792.458
kilometers per second. We observe incidentally that this c is the same that
appears in the famous formula E=mc2. We will find it several times, because
it is one of the main pieces of that great puzzle called universe changed.
Thomas Young
In that year an English doctor with many interests, including physics,
performed an experiment that would go down in history. Thomas Young
(1773-1829) was a child prodigy: he learned to read at the age of two and by
the age of six he had already read the entire Bible twice and had begun
studying Latin.3 It was then the turn of Greek, French and Italian. Soon he
was confronted with philosophy, natural history and mathematical analysis
invented by Newton; he also learned to build microscopes and telescopes.
Before the age of twenty, he learned Hebrew, Chaldean, Aramaic, the
Samaritan variant of biblical Hebrew, Turkish, Parse and Amharic. From
1792 to 1799 he studied medicine in London, Edinburgh and Göttingen,
where, forgetting his Quaker education, he was also interested in music,
dance and theater. He boasted that he had never lazy one day. Obsessed by
ancient Egypt, this extraordinary gentleman, amateur and self-taught, was
among the first to translate hieroglyphics. The compilation of the dictionary
of ancient Egyptian languages was a feat that kept him literally busy until the
day of his death.
His career as a doctor was much less fortunate, perhaps because it did not
instill confidence in the sick or because he lacked the je ne sais quoi that is
needed in relations with patients. The lack of attendance at his London clinic,
however, allowed him to take time to attend meetings of the Royal Society
and to discuss with the major scientific figures of the time. As far as we are
interested here, his greatest discoveries were in the field of optics. He began
researching the subject in 1800 and within seven years set up an
extraordinary series of experiments that seemed to confirm the undulating
theory of light with increasing confidence. But before we get to describe the
most famous one, we must take a look at the waves and their behavior.
Take for example those of the sea, so loved by surfers and romantic poets.
Let's look at them offshore, free to travel. The distance between two
consecutive ridges (or between two bellies) is called wavelength, while the
height of the ridge in relation to the surface of the calm sea is called
amplitude. The waves move at a certain speed, which in the case of light, as
we have already seen, is indicated with c. Let's fix it in one point: the period
between the passage of one crest and the next is a cycle. The frequency is the
speed at which the cycles are repeated; if for example we see three crests pass
in one minute, let's say the frequency of that wave is 3 cycles/minute. We
have that the wavelength multiplied by the frequency is equal to the speed of
the wave itself; for example, if the wave of 3 cycles/minute has a wavelength
of 30 meters, this means that it is moving at 90 meters per minute, equal to
5.4 kilometers per hour.
We now see a very familiar type of waves, those sound waves. They appear
in various frequencies. Those audible to the human ear range from 30
cycles/second of the lowest sounds to 17000 cycles/second of those above.
The central note, or the3, is set at 440 cycles/second. The speed of sound in
the air, as we have already seen, is about 1200 km/hour. Thanks to simple
calculations and remembering that the wavelength is equal to the speed
divided by frequency, we deduce that the wavelength of la3 is (330
meters/second): (440 cycles/second) = 0.75 meters. The wavelengths audible
by humans are (330 meters/second) : (440 cycles/second) = 0.75 meters: (17
000 cycles/second) = 2 centimeters to (330 meters/second) : (30
cycles/second) = 11 meters. It is this parameter, together with the speed of
sound, that determines what happens to sound waves when they echo in a
gorge, or propagate in a large open space such as a stadium, or reach the
audience of a theater.
In nature there are many types of waves: in addition to marine and sound
waves, we remember for example the vibrations of strings and seismic waves
that shake the earth beneath our feet. All of them can be described well with
classical (not quantum) physics. The amplitudes refer from time to time to
different measurable quantities: the height of the wave above sea level, the
intensity of sound waves, the displacement of the rope from the quiet state or
the compression of a spring. In any case we are always in the presence of a
perturbation, a deviation from the norm within a transmission medium that
was previously quiet. The perturbation, which we can visualize as the pinch
given to a string, propagates in the form of a wave. In the realm of classical
physics the energy transported by this process is determined by the amplitude
of the wave.
Sitting in his little boat in the middle of a lake, a fisherman threw the line. A
float is visible on the surface, which serves both to prevent the hook from
going to the bottom and to signal that something has taken the bait. The water
is rippled, and the float goes up and down following the waves. Its position
changes regularly: from level zero to a crest, then back to level zero, then
back to a belly, then back to level zero and so on. This cyclic motion is given
by a wave called harmonic or sinusoidal. Here we will simply call it "wave".
Open problems
The theory, at the time, was not able to answer satisfactorily various
questions: what exactly is the mechanism by which light is generated? how
does absorption take place and why do colored objects absorb only certain
precise wavelengths, i.e. colors? what mysterious operation inside the retina
allows us to "see"? All questions that had to do with the interaction between
light and matter. In this regard, what is the mode by which light propagates in
empty space, as between the Sun and the Earth? The analogy with sound and
material waves would lead us to think that there is a medium through which
perturbation occurs, a mysterious transparent and weightless substance that
pervades deep space. In the nineteenth century it was assumed that this
substance really existed and it was called ether.
Then there is still a mystery about our star. This colossal light generator
produces both visible and invisible light, where by "invisible light" we mean
light with a wavelength too long (from infrared on) or too short (from
ultraviolet down) to be observed. The Earth's atmosphere, primarily the
ozone layer of the upper stratosphere, blocks much of the ultraviolet rays and
even shorter waves, such as X-rays. Now let's imagine that we have invented
a device that allows us without too many complications to absorb light
selectively, only in certain frequencies, and to measure its energy.
This device exists, yes it does (it is even present in the best equipped
laboratories of high schools) and is called a spectrometer. It is the evolution
of the Newtonian prism, able to decompose light into various colors by
selectively diverting its components according to various angles. If we insert
a mechanism that allows a quantitative measurement of these angles, we can
also determine the respective wavelengths (which depend directly on the
angles themselves).
Let us now concentrate on the point where dark red fades into black, i.e. at
the border of visible light. The scale of the spectrometer tells us that we are at
7500 Å, where the letter "Å" is the symbol of the angstrom, a unit of length
named in honor of the Swedish physicist Anders Jonas Ångström, one of the
pioneers of spectroscopy. An angstrom is equal to 10-8 centimeters, or one
hundred millionth of a centimeter. We have therefore discovered that
between two ridges of light waves at the edge of the visible run 7500 Å, that
is 7.5 thousandths of a centimeter. For lengths longer than this we need
instruments sensitive to infrared and long waves. If instead we go to the other
side of the visible spectrum, on the violet side, we see that the corresponding
wavelength is about 3500 Å. Below this value the eyes do not help us and we
need to use other instruments.
So far everything is fine, we are just specifying the results obtained by
Newton on the decomposition of light. In 1802, however, the English chemist
William Wollaston pointed a spectrometer in the direction of sunlight and
discovered that in addition to the spectrum of colors neatly arranged from red
to violet there were many dark and thin lines. What was this?
At this point Joseph Fraunhofer (1787-1826), a Bavarian with great talent and
little formal education, a skilled lens maker and optics expert, entered the
scene.10 Eleventh and last son of a glassmaker who fell into poverty,
Fraunhofer barely finished elementary school and was then sent to work in
his family's workshop in Dickensian conditions. After the death of his father,
the sickly boy found unqualified employment as an apprentice at a
glassmaker and mirror manufacturer in Munich. In 1806 he managed to join
an optical instrument company in the same city, where thanks to the help of
an astronomer and a skilled craftsman he learned the secrets of optics to
perfection and developed a mathematical culture. Frustrated by the poor
quality of the glass at his disposal, the perfectionist Fraunhofer tore up a
contract that allowed him to peek into the jealously guarded industrial secrets
of a famous Swiss glassworks that had recently moved its activities to
Munich. This collaboration gave rise to technically advanced lenses and,
above all, for what we are interested in here, a fundamental discovery that
would ensure Fraunhofer a place in the history of science.
In his search for the perfect lens, he came up with the idea of using the
spectrometer to measure the refractive capacity of various types of glass. As
he examined the decomposition of sunlight, he realized that the black lines
discovered by Wollaston were really many, about six hundred. He began to
catalogue them systematically by wavelength, and by 1815 he had examined
almost all of them. The most evident were labeled with capital letters from A
to I, where A was a black line in the red area and I was at the extreme limit of
the violet. What were they caused by? Fraunhofer was aware of the
phenomenon whereby certain metals or salts, when exposed to fire, emit light
of precise colors; he measured these rays with the spectrometer and saw
many clear lines appear in the region of the wavelengths corresponding to the
color emitted.
The interesting thing was that their structure was identical to that of the black
lines in the solar spectrum. The table salt, for example, had many light lines
in the region that Fraunhofer had marked with the letter D. For an
explanatory model of the phenomenon we had to wait a little longer. As we
know, each well defined wavelength corresponds to a uniquely defined
frequency. It had to be a mechanism that made the matter vibrate, presumably
at atomic level, according to certain established frequencies. The atoms
(which at Fraunhofer's time had not yet been proven to exist) left
macroscopic imprints.
The imprints of atoms
As we have seen above, a tuning fork set to "give the go" vibrates at a
frequency of 440 cycles per second. In the microscopic realm of atoms the
frequencies are immensely higher, but already in Fraunhofer's time it was
possible to imagine a mechanism by which the mysterious particles were
equipped with many very small equivalents of the tuning fork, each with its
own characteristic frequency and able to vibrate and emit light with a
wavelength corresponding to the frequency itself.
And why then appear the black lines? If the sodium atoms excited by the heat
of the flame vibrate with frequencies that emit light between 5911 and 5962
Å (values that correspond to shades of yellow), it is likely that, in reverse,
they prefer to absorb light with the same wavelengths. The hot surface of the
Sun emits light of all kinds, but it then passes through the "corona", i.e. the
less hot gases of the solar atmosphere. This is where selective absorption
occurs by the atoms, each of which retains light of the wavelength congenial
to it; this mechanism is responsible for the strange black lines observed by
Fraunhofer. One piece at a time, subsequent research has revealed that each
element, when excited by heat, emits a characteristic series of spectral lines,
some sharp and sharp (such as bright red neon), others weak (such as the blue
of mercury vapor lamps). These lines are the fingerprints of the elements, and
their discovery was a first indication of the existence of mechanisms similar
to the "tuning forks" seen above (or some other devilry) within atoms.
The spectral lines are very well defined, so it is possible to calibrate the
spectrometer in order to provide very precise results, distinguishing for
example a light with a wavelength of 6503.2 Å (dark red) from another to
6122.7 Å (light red). At the end of the 19th century, thick tomes were
published listing the spectra of all the elements then known, thanks to which
the most skilled spectroscopy experts were able to determine the chemical
composition of unknown compounds and to recognize even the smallest
contamination. Yet no one had any idea what was the mechanism responsible
for producing such clear messages. How the atom worked remained a
mystery.
Another success of spectroscopy was of a deeper nature. In the Sun
fingerprint we could read, incredibly, many elements present on Earth:
hydrogen, helium, lithium and so on. When we started to analyze the light
coming from stars and distant galaxies, we realized that the result was
similar. The universe is composed in every place by the same elements,
which follow the same laws of nature, which suggests that everything had a
unique origin thanks to a mysterious physical process of creation.
In parallel, between the seventeenth and nineteenth centuries science was
trying to solve another problem: how do forces, and particularly gravity,
transmit their action over great distances? If we attach a carriage to a horse,
we see that the force used by the animal to pull the vehicle is transmitted
directly, through the harnesses and rods. But how does the Earth "feel" the
Sun, which is 150 million kilometers away? How does a magnet attract a nail
placed at a certain distance? In these cases there are no visible connections,
so we must assume a mysterious "action at a distance". According to
Newton's formulation, gravity acts at a distance, but it is not given to know
what is the "rod" that connects two bodies like the Earth and the Sun. After
having vainly struggled with this problem, even the great English physicist
had to surrender and let posterity take care of the matter.
What is a black body and why do we care so much?
All bodies emit energy and absorb it from their surroundings. Here for
"body" we mean a great object, that is macroscopic, composed from many
billions of atoms. The higher its temperature, the greater the amount of
energy emitted.
The warm bodies, in all their parts (which we can consider in turn as bodies),
tend to reach a balance between the value of the energy given to the external
environment and that absorbed. If, for example, you take an egg from the
fridge and plunge it into a pot full of boiling water, the egg gets hot and the
temperature of the water decreases. Conversely, if you throw a hot egg in
cold water the heat transfer takes place in the opposite direction. If you do not
provide more energy, after a while egg and water will be at the same
temperature. It is a home experiment easy to perform, which clearly
illustrates the behavior of the bodies with respect to heat. The final state in
which egg and water temperatures are equal is called thermal equilibrium,
and is a universal phenomenon: a hot object immersed in a cold environment
cools down, and vice versa. At thermal equilibrium, all the parts of which the
body is made up are at the same temperature, therefore they emit and absorb
energy in the same way.
When you are lying on a beach on a beautiful day, your body is emitting and
absorbing electromagnetic radiation: on the one hand you absorb energy
produced by the primeval radiator, the Sun, and on the other hand you emit a
certain amount of heat because the body has regulation mechanisms that
allow it to maintain the right internal temperature.1 A healthy adult man, at a
temperature of 37 °C, radiates about 100 watts into the surrounding
environment. The various parts of the body, from the liver to the brain, from
the heart to the fingertips, are kept in thermal equilibrium so that biochemical
processes take place without any problems. If the environment is very cold,
the body must produce more energy, or at least not disperse it around, if it
wants to maintain the ideal temperature. The blood flow, which is responsible
for the transfer of heat to the surface of the body, is therefore reduced so that
internal organs do not lose heat, which is why we feel cold in our fingers and
nose. On the contrary, when the environment is very hot, the body has to
increase the dispersed energy, which happens thanks to sweat: the
evaporation of this hot liquid on the skin involves the use of an additional
amount of energy of the body (a sort of air conditioning effect), which is then
dispersed outside. The fact that the human body radiates heat is evident in
closed and crowded rooms: thirty people piled in a meeting room produce 3
kilowatts, which are able to heat the environment quickly. On the contrary, in
the Antarctic those same boring colleagues could save your life if you
embrace them tightly, as emperor penguins do to protect their fragile eggs
from the rigours of the long winter.
Humans, penguins and even toasters are complex systems that produce
energy from within. In our case, the fuel is given by food or fat stored in the
body; a toaster instead has as its energy source the collisions of electrons in
the electric current with the heavy metal atoms of which the resistance is
made. The electromagnetic radiation emitted, in both cases, is dispersed in
the external environment through the surface in contact with air, in our case
the skin. This radiation usually has a color that is the imprint of particular
"atomic transitions", that is, it is the daughter of chemistry. Fireworks, for
example, when they explode are certainly hot and the light they emit depends
on the nature of the compounds they contain (strontium chloride, barium
chloride and others),2 thanks to whose oxidation they shine bright and
spectacular colors.
These particular cases are fascinating, but the electromagnetic radiation
always behaves in the same way, in any system, in the simplest case: the one
in which all the chromatic effects due to the various atoms are mixed and
cancelled, giving life to what physicists call thermal radiation. The ideal
object that produces it is called black body. It is therefore a body that by
definition produces only thermal radiation when heated, without a particular
color prevailing - and without the special effects of fireworks. Even if it is an
abstract concept, there are objects of daily use that can be approximated
rather well to an ideal black body. For example, the Sun emits light with a
well-defined spectrum (the Fraunhofer lines), due to the presence of various
types of atoms in the surrounding gaseous corona; but if we consider the
radiation as a whole we see that it is very similar to that of a (very hot) black
body. The same can be said for the hot embers, the toaster resistances, the
Earth's atmosphere, the mushroom of a nuclear explosion and the primordial
universe: all reasonable approximations of a black body.
A very good model is given by an old style coal boiler, like for example the
one present in steam trains, that as the temperature rises produces inside it
practically pure thermal radiation. In fact it was this the model used from the
physicists of end XIX century for the study of the black body. To have a
source of pure thermal radiation, it must be isolated in some way from the
heat source, in this case the burning coal. For this purpose we build a robust
and thick-walled container, say iron, in which we drill a hole to observe what
happens inside and make measurements. Let's put it in the boiler, let it heat
up and peek through the hole. We detect a pure thermal radiation, which fills
the entire container. This is emitted from the hot walls and bounces from one
end to the other; a small part comes out from the observation hole.
With the help of a few instruments we can study the heat radiation and check
to what extent the various colors (i.e. the various wavelengths) are present.
We can also measure how the composition changes when the temperature of
the boiler changes, i.e. study the radiation in thermal equilibrium.
At the beginning the hole emits only lukewarm and invisible infrared
radiation. When we turn up the heating we see a dark red light that looks like
the one visible inside the toaster. Increasing the temperature again the red
becomes brighter, until it becomes yellow. With a particularly powerful
machine, like the Bessemer converter of steel mills (where oxygen is
introduced), we can reach very high temperatures and see how the radiation
becomes practically white. If we could use an even stronger heat source
(therefore not a classic boiler, which would melt), we would observe a bright
light tending to blue coming out from the hole at very high temperature. We
have reached the level of nuclear explosions or bright stars like Rigel, the
blue supergiant of the Orion constellation which is the highest energy source
of thermal radiation in our galactic vicinity.
The study of thermal radiation was an important field of research, at the time
completely new, which combined two different subjects: the study of heat
and thermal balance, or thermodynamics, and electromagnetic radiation. The
collected data seemed completely harmless and gave anyway the possibility
to make interesting researches. Nobody could suspect that they were
important clues in what would soon become the scientific yellow of the
millennium: the quantum properties of light and atoms (that in the end are
those that do all the work).
Chapter 4
Mr. Planck




T heconclusion
       classical theory of light and Planck's calculations led not only to the
                that the distribution of wavelengths was concentrated in the
    blue-violet parts, but even (due to the desperation of theoretical
physicists, who were increasingly perplexed) that the intensity became
infinite in the more remote regions of ultraviolet. There was someone,
perhaps a journalist, who called the situation an "ultraviolet catastrophe". In
fact it was a disaster, because the theoretical prediction did not agree at all
with the experimental data. To listen to the calculations, the embers would
not emit red light, as humanity has known for at least a hundred thousand
years, but blue light.
It was one of the first cracks in the building of classical physics, which until
then seemed unassailable. (Gibbs had found another one, probably the first
ever, about twenty-five years earlier; at the time its importance had not been
understood, except perhaps by Maxwell). The black body radiation curves
shown in figure 4.1 have peaks that depend on temperature (more towards red
at the low ones, more towards blue at the high ones). All of them, however,
go down quickly to zero in the very short wave area. What happens when an
elegant and well tested theory, conceived by the greatest minds of the time
and certified by all European academies, clashes with the brute and crude
experimental data? If for religions dogmas are untouchable, for science
defective theories are bound to be swept away sooner or later.
Classical physics predicts that the toaster will shine blue when everyone
knows it is red. Remember this: every time you make toast, you are observing
a phenomenon that blatantly violates classical laws. And even if maybe you
do not know it (for now), you are having the experimental confirmation that
light is made of discrete particles, it is quantized. It is quantum mechanics
live! But, you will object, haven't we just seen in the previous chapter that
thanks to the genius of Mr. Young it has been proved that light is a wave?
Sure, and it is true. Let's get ready, because things are about to get very
strange. We are still travelers exploring new and bizarre worlds far away -
and yet we still get there even from a toaster.
Max Planck
Berlin, the epicenter of the ultraviolet catastrophe, was the realm of Max
Planck, a theoretical physicist then in his forties, a great thermodynamic
expert.7 Fully aware of the catastrophe, he was the first to want to understand
something about it. In 1900, starting from the experimental data collected by
his colleagues and using a mathematical trick, he managed to transform the
formula derived from classical theory into another one that matched the
measurements very well. Planck's manipulation allowed the long waves to
show themselves quietly at all temperatures, more or less as expected by
classical physics, but he cut the short waves imposing a sort of "toll" on their
emission. This obstacle limited the presence of blue light, which in fact
radiated less abundantly.
The trick seemed to work. The "toll" made the higher frequencies (remember:
short waves = high frequencies) were more "expensive", that is they required
much more energy than the low ones. So, according to Planck's right
reasoning, at low temperatures the energy was not enough to "pay the toll"
and short waves were not emitted. To return to our theatrical metaphor, a way
had been found to free the front rows and push the spectators towards the
middle rows and the tunnels. A sudden intuition (which was not typical of his
way of working) allowed Planck to connect wavelength (or frequency
equivalent) to energy: the longer the length, the less energy.
It seems an elementary idea, and indeed it is, because that's how nature
works. But classical physics did not contemplate it at all. The energy of an
electromagnetic wave according to Maxwell's theory depended only on its
intensity, not on color or frequency. How did Planck put this characteristic in
his treatment of the black body? How did he manage to pass the idea that
energy depends on intensity but also on frequency? There is still one piece
missing from the puzzle, because you have to specify what has more energy
as the frequencies increase.
To solve the problem, Planck found an efficient way to divide the emitted
light, whatever the wavelength, into packets called quantum, each of which
has a quantity of energy related to its frequency. Planck's illuminating
formula is really as simple as possible:
E=hf
Put in words: "the energy of a quantum of light is directly proportional to its
frequency". So the electromagnetic radiation is composed of many small
packages, each of which has a certain energy, equal to its frequency
multiplied by a constant h. The intensity of the emitted light is equal to the
number of those who register at a certain frequency multiplied by their
energy. Planck's effort to reconcile the data with the theory led to the idea
that high frequencies (i.e. short waves) were expensive in terms of energy for
the black body. His equation, at all temperatures, was in perfect harmony
with the curves obtained from experimental measurements.
It is interesting to note that Planck did not immediately realize that his
modification to Maxwell's theory had directly to do with the nature of light.
Instead, he was convinced that the key to the phenomenon was in the atoms
that made up the walls of the black body, that is the way the light was
emitted. The preference for red over blue was not due, for him, to intrinsic
properties of these wavelengths, but to the way the atoms moved and emitted
radiation of various colors. In this way he hoped to avoid conflicts with
classical theory, which had worked wonders until then: after all, electric
motors were pushing trains and streetcars all over Europe and Marconi had
just patented the wireless telegraph. Maxwell's theory was obviously not
wrong and Planck had no intention of correcting it: better to try to amend the
most mysterious thermodynamics.
Yet his hypothesis about thermal radiation involved two sensational
deviations from classical physics. First, the correlation between the intensity
(i.e. the energy content) of the radiation and its frequency, completely absent
in the Maxwellian picture. Then, the introduction of discrete quantities,
quanta. These are two aspects related to each other. For Maxwell the intensity
was a continuous quantity, able to assume any real value, dependent only on
the values of electric and magnetic fields associated with the light wave. For
Planck the intensity at a given frequency is equal to the number of quanta
corresponding to the frequency itself, each of which carries an energy equal
to E=hf. It was an idea that smelled suspiciously of "light particles", yet all
the diffraction and interference experiments continued to confirm the wave-
like nature.
Nobody then, including Planck, fully understood the meaning of this turning
point. For their discoverer, the quanta were concentrated impulses of
radiation, coming from the atoms of the black body in frantic movement due
to thermal agitation, which emitted them according to unknown mechanisms.
He could not have known that that h, now called Planck's constant, would
become the spark of a revolution that would lead to the first roars of quantum
mechanics and modern physics. For the great discovery of the "quantum
energy", occurred when he was forty-two years old, Planck was awarded the
Nobel Prize for physics in 1918.
Einstein enters the scene
The extraordinary consequences of the introduction of quantum physics were
understood immediately afterwards by a young physicist then unknown, none
other than Albert Einstein. He read Planck's article in 1900 and, as he later
declared, he felt "the earth beneath his feet is missing".8 The underlying
problem was this: were the energy packets children of the emission
mechanism or were they an intrinsic characteristic of light? Einstein realized
that the new theory was deploying a well-defined, disturbingly discreet,
particle-like entity that intervened in the process of light emission by
superheated substances. At first, however, the young physicist refrained from
embracing the idea that quantization was a fundamental characteristic of
light.
Here it is necessary to say a few words about Einstein. He was not a child
prodigy and did not particularly like school. As a boy, no one would have
predicted a successful future for him. But science had always fascinated him,
ever since the day his father showed him a compass when he was four years
old. He was bewitched by it: invisible forces forced the needle to always
point north, in whatever direction it was turned. As he wrote in his old age: "I
remember well, or rather I think I remember well, the deep and lasting
impression left by this experience. Still at a young age, Einstein was also
captivated by the magic of algebra, which he had learned from an uncle, and
bewitched by a geometry book read at the age of twelve. At sixteen he wrote
his first scientific article, dedicated to the ether in the magnetic field.
At the point where our story has arrived, Einstein is still a stranger. Not
having obtained a university assignment of any kind after the end of his
studies, he began to give private lectures and make substitutes, and then came
to the position of employee at the Swiss Patent Office in Bern. Although he
only had weekends free for his research, in the seven years he spent in that
office he laid the foundations of 20th century physics and discovered a way
to count atoms (i.e. to measure Avogadro's constant), invented narrow
relativity (with all its profound consequences on our notions of space and
time, without forgetting E=mc2), made important contributions to quantum
theory and more. Among his many talents, Einstein could include
synesthesia, i.e. the ability to combine data from different senses, for example
vision and hearing. When he meditated on a problem, his mental processes
were always accompanied by images and he realized that he was on the right
track because he felt a tingling sensation at his fingertips. His name would
become synonymous with great scientist in 1919, when thanks to a solar
eclipse there was experimental confirmation of his theory of general
relativity. The Nobel Prize, however, obtained him for a work of 1905,
different from relativity: the explanation of the photoelectric effect.
Just imagine the culture shock experienced by physicists in 1900, who were
quiet and serene in their studies to consult the data on the continuous spectra
of radiation emitted by hot objects, data that had accumulated for almost half
a century. The experiments that had produced them were possible thanks to
Maxwell's theory of electromagnetism, accepted by about thirty years, which
predicted that light was a wave. The fact that a phenomenon so typically
wave-like could, in some circumstances, behave as if it was composed of
discrete packets of energy, in other words "particles", threw the scientific
community in a terrible state of confusion. Planck and his colleagues,
however, assumed that sooner or later they would arrive at a high level, so to
speak, neoclassical explanation. After all, black body radiation was a very
complicated phenomenon, like atmospheric weather, in which many events in
themselves simple to describe come together in an apparently elusive
complex state. But perhaps the most incomprehensible aspect of it was the
way nature seemed to reveal for the first time, to those who had the patience
to observe it, its most intimate secrets.
Arthur Compton
In 1923 the particle hypothesis marked a point in its favor thanks to the work
of Arthur Compton, who began to study the photoelectric effect with X-rays
(very short-wave light). The results obtained by him did not lie: the photons
that collided with electrons behaved like particles, that is like small billiard
balls.11 The electron at first stationary splashes off and the photon that is
thrown against it rebounds. This phenomenon is now called "Compton effect"
or more properly "scattering Compton".
As in all elastic collisions in classical physics, during this process the total
energy and the momentum of the electron + photon system are preserved. But
in order to fully understand what happens, it is necessary to break the delay
and treat the photon as a particle to all effects, step to which Compton arrived
gradually, after having noticed the failure of all his previous assumptions. In
1923 the nascent quantum theory (Niels Bohr's "old quantum theory") was
not yet able to explain the Compton effect, which would be understood only
thanks to subsequent developments. When the American physicist presented
his results at a conference of the American Physical Society, he had to face
the open opposition of many colleagues.
As a good son of a family from the Mennonite minority in Wooster, Ohio,
used to work hard, Compton did not lose heart and continued to refine his
experiments and interpretations of the results. The final confrontation took
place in 1924, during a seminar of the British Association for the
Advancement of Science specifically organized in Toronto. Compton was
very convincing. His arch-enemy, William Duane of Harvard, who until then
had not been able to replicate his results, returned to the laboratory and redo
the controversial experiment himself. In the end he was forced to admit that
the Compton effect was true. His discoverer won the Nobel Prize in 1927.
Compton was one of the main architects of the development of American
physics in the twentieth century, so much so that he was given the honor of a
cover of the "Times" on January 13, 1936.
Summing up, what do these results show? On the one hand, we are faced
with various phenomena that show that light seems to consist of a stream of
particles, how many luminous called photons (poor Newton, if only he had
known...). On the other hand we have Young's experiment with the double
slit (and millions of other experiments that confirm it, still performed in
school laboratories all over the world), thanks to which light shows to behave
like a wave. Three hundred years after the wave-particle dispute, we are still
back to the beginning. Is it perhaps an irresolvable paradox? How can an
entity be simultaneously a wave and a particle? Do we have to give up
physics and dedicate ourselves to Zen and motorcycle maintenance?
Glass and mirrors
The photon, as a particle, simply "is there". It triggers detectors, collides with
other particles, explains the photoelectric effect and the Compton effect. It
exists! But it does not explain the interference - and also another
phenomenon.
You will remember that in chapter 1 we stopped in front of a store window
full of sexy underwear. Now we continue our walk and we arrive at the
windows of a department store, where the spring-summer collection is
displayed on elegant mannequins. The sun is shining and the contents of the
window is clearly visible; but on the glass we realize that there is also a faint
reflection of the street and passers-by, including us. By chance, in this
showcase is also contained a mirror, which reflects in detail our image. So we
see ourselves twice: clearly in the mirror and weakly in the glass.
Here is a plausible explanation: the sun's rays reflect on the surface of our
body, pass through the showcase, hit the mirror and come back until they
reach our retina. A small percentage of the light, however, comes also
reflected from the same showcase. Well, so what? All this is perfectly logical,
however it is seen. If the light is a wave, no problem: the waves are normally
subject to reflection and partial refraction. If the light, instead, is constituted
from a flow of particles we can explain the all admitting that a certain part of
the photons, we say the 96 per cent, passes through the glass and the
remaining 4 per cent comes reflected. But if we take a single photon of this
huge stream, consisting of particles all the same, how do we know how it will
behave in front of the glass? How does our photon (let's call it Bernie) decide
which way to go?
Now let's imagine this horde of identical particles heading towards the
window. The great majority crosses it, but some from time to time is rejected.
We remember that the photons give themselves for indivisible and irreducible
- nobody has ever seen in nature 96 per cent of a photon. So Bernie has two
alternatives: either he passes through in one piece, or he is rejected in one
piece. In the latter case, which occurs 4% of the time, perhaps he collided
with one of the many glass atoms. But if the things were so we would not see
our image reflected in the weak but well delineated showcase; we would
observe instead a glass slightly tarnished from that 4 per cent of lost photons.
The image, that we recognize without problems as "ours", indicates that we
are in presence of a coherent and undulating phenomenon, and yet the
photons exist. Here we are faced with another problem, that of partial
reflection. It seems that there is a 4% probability that a photon, understood as
a particle, ends up in a wave that is reflected. That Planck's hypotheses led to
the introduction of random and probabilistic elements in physics was already
clear to Einstein in 1901. He did not like it at all, and over time his disgust
would grow.
The walrus and the panettone
As if Planck's solution to the ultraviolet catastrophe problem and Einstein's
explanation of the photoelectric effect were not shocking enough, classical
physics was faced with a third wake-up call in the early 20th century: the
failure of Thomson's atomic model, or "panettone model".
Ernest Rutherford (1871-1937) was a ruffled big man who looked like a
walrus. After winning the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his research in
radioactivity, in 1917 he became director of the prestigious Cavendish
Laboratory in Cambridge. He was born in New Zealand into a large farming
family; life on the farm had accustomed him to hard work and made him a
resourceful man. A lover of machines and technological innovation, he had
dabbled since childhood in fixing watches and building working models of
water mills. In his postgraduate studies, he was involved in electromagnetism
and was able to build a radio wave detector before Marconi conducted his
famous experiments. Thanks to a scholarship he arrived at Cambridge, where
his radio, capable of picking up signals from almost a kilometer away, made
a favorable impression on many professors, including J. J. Thomson, who at
the time ran the Cavendish Laboratory.
Thomson invited Rutherford to work with him on one of the novelties of the
time, X-rays, then known as Becquerel rays, and to study the phenomenon of
electrical discharge in gases. The young kiwi was homesick, but that was a
must-have offer. The result of their collaboration was summarized in a
famous article on ionization, which was explained by the fact that X-rays,
colliding with matter, seemed to create an equal number of electrically
charged particles, called "ions". Thomson would then publicly claim that he
never knew anyone as skilled and passionate about research as his student.
Around 1909 Rutherford coordinated a working group dedicated to the so-
called alpha particles, which were fired against a thin sheet of gold to see
how their trajectories were diverted by the heavy metal atoms. In those
experiments something unexpected happened. Almost all the particles were
diverted a little bit, while passing through the gold foil, directed to a detection
screen at a certain distance. But one in every eight thousand bounced and did
not go beyond the foil. As Rutherford then said, "it was like firing a mortar at
a sheet of paper and seeing the bullet come back. What was happening? Was
there something inside the metal that could repel alpha, heavy, positively
charged particles?
Thanks to previous research by J.J. Thomson, at that time it was known that
atoms contained electrons, light and electrically negative. To make the
construction stable and to balance it all, of course, it was necessary the
presence of an equal and opposite amount of positive charges. Where they
were, however, was then a mystery. Before Rutherford, no one had been able
to give a shape inside the atom.
In 1905 J. J. Thomson had proposed a model that provided a positive charge
spread in a homogeneous way inside the atom and the various electrons
scattered around like raisins in the panettone - for this reason it was baptized
by the physicists "panettone model" (plum pudding model in English). If the
atom was really made like this, the alpha particles of the above experiment
should always pass through the foil: it would be like shooting bullets on a
shaving foam veil. Here, now imagine that in this situation one bullet out of
every eight thousand is deflected by the foam until it comes back. This
happened in Rutherford's laboratory.
According to his calculations, the only way to explain the phenomenon was
to admit that all the mass and the positive charge of the atom were
concentrated in a "nucleus", a small ball located in the center of the atom
itself. In this way there would have been the mass and charge concentrations
necessary to repel the alpha particles, heavy and positive, that eventually
arrived on a collision course. It was as if inside the shaving foam veil there
were many hard and resistant balls, able to deflect and repel the bullets. The
electrons in turn were not scattered but they went around the nucleus. Thanks
to Rutherford, therefore, the panettone model was delivered to the dustbin of
history. The atom looked rather like a small solar system, with miniature
planets (the electrons) orbiting around a dense and dark star (the nucleus), all
held together by electromagnetic forces.
With further experiments it was discovered that the nucleus was really tiny:
its volume was about one thousandth of billionth of the atom. For contrast, it
contained in itself more than 99,98 percent of the total mass of the atom. So
the matter was largely made of vacuum, of dots around which electrons were
whirling around and at great distance. Really incredible: matter is basically
made of nothing! (also the "solid" armchair you are sitting on now is almost
all empty). At the time of this discovery the classical physics, from Newton's
F=ma to Maxwell's laws, was still considered unassailable, both at
microscopic level and at large scale, at solar system level. It was believed that
in the atom were at work the same laws valid elsewhere. Everyone slept
peaceful dreams, until Niels Bohr arrived.
The melancholy Dane
One day, Niels Bohr, a young Danish theorist who was perfecting at the time
at the Cavendish Laboratory, attended a conference in Rutherford and was so
impressed by the great experimenter's new atomic theory that he asked him to
work with him at the University of Manchester, where he was then. He
agreed to host him for four months in 1912.
Reflecting calmly on the new experimental data, Bohr soon realized that there
was something wrong with the model. In fact, it was a disaster! If you apply
Maxwell equations to an electron in very fast circular orbit around the
nucleus, it results that the particle loses almost immediately all its energy, in
the form of electromagnetic waves. Because of this the orbital ray becomes
smaller and smaller, reducing to zero in only 10-16 seconds (one ten
millionth of a billionth of a second). In few words, an electron according to
classical physics should fall almost instantly on the nucleus. So the atom, that
is matter, is unstable, and the world as we know it is physically impossible.
Maxwell equations seemed to involve the collapse of the orbital model. So
the model was wrong, or were the venerable laws of classical physics.
Bohr started to study the simplest atom of all, the hydrogen one, that in
Rutherford's model is a single negative electron orbiting around the positive
nucleus. Thinking back to Planck and Einstein's results, and to some ideas
that were in the air about the wave behavior of particles, the young Dane
launched in a very little classical and very risky hypothesis. According to
Bohr electron are allowed only certain orbits, because their motion inside the
atom is similar to that of waves. Among the allowed orbits there is one of
minimum energy level, where the electron is as close as possible to the
nucleus: the particle cannot go down more than that and therefore it cannot
emit energy while jumping to a lower level - which does not exist at all. This
special configuration is called fundamental state.
With his model, Bohr tried first of all to explain theoretically the discrete
spectrum of atoms, those more or less dark lines that we have already met. As
you will remember, the various elements, if heated until they emit light, leave
on the spectrometer a characteristic imprint consisting of a series of colored
lines that stand out clearly against a darker background. In the spectrum of
sunlight, then, there are also black and thin lines at certain precise points. The
light lines correspond to the emissions, the dark lines to the absorptions.
Hydrogen, like all elements, has its spectral "fingerprint": to these data,
known at the time, Bohr was trying to apply his newborn model.
In three subsequent articles published in 1913, the Danish physicist
enunciated his daring quantum theory of hydrogen atom. The orbits allowed
to the electron are characterized by fixed amounts of energy, that we will call
E1, E2, E3 etc. An electron emits radiation when it "jumps" from a higher
level, let's say E3, to a lower one, let's say E2: it is a photon whose energy
(given, remember, from E=hf) is equal to the difference between the two
levels. So E2-E3=hf. Adding this effect in the billions of atoms where the
process happens at the same time, we obtain as result the clear lines of the
spectrum. Thanks to a model that kept in part the Newtonian mechanics but it
differed when it disagreed with the experimental data, Bohr was triumphantly
able to calculate the wavelengths corresponding to all spectral lines of
hydrogen. His formulas depended only on known constants and values, such
as mass and electron charge (as usual seasoned here and there by symbols
like π and, of course, the hallmark of quantum mechanics, Planck constant h).
Summing up, in Bohr's model the electron remains confined in few allowed
orbits, as if by magic, that correspond to well defined energy levels E1, E2,
E3 etc. The electron can absorb energy only in "packets" or "quanta"; if it
absorbs a sufficient number, it can "jump" from the level where it is at to a
higher one, for example from E2 to E3; vice versa, electrons in the higher
levels can spontaneously slide down, returning for example from E3 to E2,
and in doing so they emit quanta of light, that is photons. These photons can
be observed because they have specific wavelengths, which correspond to the
spectral lines. Their values are predicted exactly, in the case of hydrogen
atom, by Bohr model.
The character of the atom
So it is thanks to Rutherford and Bohr if today the most known representation
of the atom is the solar system one, where small electrons whizz around the
nucleus like many small planets, on orbits similar to the elliptical ones
foreseen by Kepler. Many maybe think that the model is precise and the atom
is made just like that. Alas no, because Bohr's intuitions were brilliant but not
entirely correct. The proclamation of the triumph was premature. It was
realized that his model was applied only to the simplest atom, the hydrogen
one, but it failed already at the next step, with helium, atom equipped with
two electrons. The twenties were just around the corner and quantum
mechanics seemed stuck. Only the first step had been done, corresponding to
what today we call "old quantum theory".
The founding fathers, Planck, Einstein, Rutherford and Bohr, had started the
revolution but had not yet reaped the fruits. It was clear to everyone that
innocence was lost and that physics was becoming strange and mysterious:
there was a world of packet energy and electrons magically jumping only on
certain orbits and not on others, a world where photons are waves and
particles at the same time, without being at the bottom neither one nor the
other. There was still a lot to understand.
Chapter 5
An uncertain Heisenberg




A ndthe hererealis the moment you've all been waiting for. We are about to face
                   quantum mechanics head-on and enter into alien and
    disconcerting territory. The new science pushed to exasperation also
Wolfgang Pauli, one of the greatest physicist ever, who in 1925 in a letter to a
colleague said he was ready to give up the fight: "Physics is now too difficult.
I would rather be a comic actor, or something like that, than a physicist". If
such a giant of scientific thought had abandoned research to become the Jerry
Lewis of his time, today we would not be talking about the "Pauli exclusion
principle" and the history of science could have taken a very different turn.1
Fortunately Pauli held out, as we hope you will do in the next pages. The
journey we are about to embark on is not recommended for the faint of heart,
but reaching the destination will be an extraordinary reward.
Nature is made in packages
Let's start again from the old quantum theory, formulated by Bohr to account
for the results of the Rutherford experiment. As you will remember, it
replaced the "panettone" atom model with the idea that there was a dense
central nucleus surrounded by whizzing electrons - a configuration similar to
the solar system, with our star at the center and the planets orbiting around it.
We have already said that also this model has passed to better life. Victim of
subsequent refinements, the old quantum theory, with its crazy mixture of
classical mechanics and ad hoc quantum adjustments, was at some point
completely abandoned. The merit of Bohr was however to present to the
world for the first time a quantum atom model, which gained credibility
thanks to the results of the brilliant experiment that we will see shortly.
According to the classical laws, no electron could ever remain in orbit around
the nucleus. Its motion would be accelerated, like all circular motions
(because the speed continuously changes direction in time), and according to
Maxwell's laws every charged particle in accelerated motion emits energy in
the form of electromagnetic radiation, that is light. According to classical
calculations, an electron in orbit would lose almost immediately its energy,
that would go away in the form of electromagnetic radiation; therefore the
particle in question would lose altitude and would soon crash against the
nucleus. The classic atom could not exist, if not in collapsed form, therefore
chemically dead and unserviceable. The classical theory was not able to
justify the energetic values of electrons and nuclei. It was therefore necessary
to invent a new model: the quantum theory.
Moreover, as it was already known at the end of 1800 thanks to the spectral
lines data, atoms emit light but only with defined colors, that is with
wavelengths (or frequencies) at discrete, quantized values. It seems almost
that only particular orbits can exist, and electrons are bound to jump from one
to another every time they emit or absorb energy. If it was true the
"Keplerian" model of the atom as solar system, the spectrum of emitted
radiation would be continuous, because the classical mechanics allows the
existence of a continuous range of orbits. It seems instead that the atomic
world is "discrete", very different from the continuity provided by Newtonian
physics.
Bohr focused his attention on the simplest atom of all, the hydrogen one, with
only one proton in the nucleus and one electron orbiting around it. Playing a
bit with the new ideas of quantum mechanics, he realized that he could apply
to electrons the Planck hypothesis, that is to associate to a certain wavelength
(or frequency) the momentum (or energy) of a photon, from which it could be
deduced the existence of discrete orbits. After several attempts, finally came
to the right formula. Bohr "special" orbits were circular and each one had an
assigned circumference, always equal to the quantum wavelength of the
electron derived from Planck equation. These magic orbits corresponded to
particular energy values, therefore the atom could have only a discrete series
of energy states.
Bohr immediately understood that there was a minimum orbit, along which
the electron was as close as possible to the nucleus. From this level it could
not fall any lower, therefore the atom was not going to collapse and its fatal
destiny. This minimum orbit is known as fundamental state and it
corresponds to the minimum energy state of the electron. Its existence
implies the stability of the atom. Today we know that this property
characterizes all quantum systems.
Bohr's hypothesis was really effective: from the new equations all the
numbers that corresponded to the values observed in the experiments were
coming out one after the other. Atomic electrons are, as physicists say,
"bound" and without the energy supply from the outside they continue to turn
around the nucleus. The amount of energy needed to make them to blow
away and free them from the atomic bond is called bonding energy, and it
depends on the orbit in which the particle is located. (Usually we mean this
energy as the minimum required to move an electron away from the atom and
bring it to infinite distance and with zero kinetic energy, which we
conventionally say is zero energy; but it is just a convention). Vice versa, if a
free electron is captured by an atom, it releases a quantity of energy, in the
form of photons, equal to the bonding of the orbit in which it ends up.
The bonding energies of orbits (i.e. states) are usually measured in units
called electronvolt (symbol: eV). The fundamental state in hydrogen atom,
that corresponds to that special orbit of minimum distance from nucleus and
maximum bonding energy, has energy equal to 13,6 eV. This value can be
obtained theoretically also thanks to the so-called "Rydberg's formula", so
called in honor of the Swedish physicist Johannes Rydberg, who in 1888
(extending some researches by Johann Balmer and others) had advanced an
empirical explanation of the spectral lines of hydrogen and other atoms. In
fact the value of 13,6 eV and the formula from which it can be derived were
known for some years, but Bohr was the first to give a rigorous theoretical
justification.
The quantum states of an electron in hydrogen atom (equivalent to one of
Bohr's orbits) are represented with an integer number n = 1, 2, 3, ... The state
with the highest bonding energy, the fundamental one, corresponds to n=1;
the first excited state to n=2, and so on. The fact that this discrete set of states
is the only one possible in atoms is the essence of quantum theory. The
number n has the honor of a name all its own in physics and is called "main
quantum number". Each state, or quantum number, is characterized by an
energetic value (in eV, like the one seen above) and is labeled with the letters
E1, E2, E3 etc.. (see note 3).
As you will remember, in this theory, outdated but not forgotten, it is
expected that electrons emit photons jumping from a higher energy state to a
lower energy state. This rule obviously does not apply to the fundamental
state E1, that is when n=1, because in this case the electron has no lower orbit
available. These transitions happen in a completely predictable and logical
way. If for example the electron in the state n=3 goes down to the state n=2,
the occupant of this last orbit must level down to n=1. Each jump is
accompanied by the emission of a photon with energy equal to the difference
between the energies of the involved states, as for example E2-E3 or E1-E2.
In case of hydrogen atom, the corresponding numerical values are 10,5 eV -
9,2 eV = 1,3 eV, and 13,6 eV - 10,5 eV = 3,1 eV. Since energy E and
wavelength λ of a photon are related by Planck's formula E=hf=hc/λ, it is
possible to derive the energy of emitted photons by measuring their
wavelength thanks to spectroscopy. At Bohr's time the accounts seemed to
come back for what concerns the hydrogen atom, the simplest one (only one
electron around a proton), but already in front of helium, the second element
in order of simplicity, we did not know well how to proceed.
In Bohr came another idea, that is to measure the electron momentum
through the energy absorption by the atoms, reversing the reasoning seen
above. If the hypothesis of quantum states is true, then atoms can acquire
energy only in packets corresponding to the differences between states
energies, E2 - E3, E1 - E2 and so on. The crucial experiment for the
verification of this hypothesis was conducted in 1914 by James Franck and
Gustav Hertz in Berlin, and was perhaps the last important research
conducted in Germany before the outbreak of the First World War. The two
scientists obtained results perfectly compatible with Bohr's theory, of which
they were unaware. They would have known the results of the great Danish
physicist only several years later.
The terrible twenties
It is difficult to realize the panic that spread among the world's greatest
physicists at the beginning of the terrible 1920s, between 1920 and 1925.
After four centuries of faith in the existence of rational principles underlying
the laws of nature, science suddenly found itself forced to revise its own
foundations. The aspect that most disturbed consciences, lulled by the
reassuring certainties of the past, was the disconcerting duality of quantum
theory. On the one hand, there was abundant experimental evidence that light
behaved like a wave, with a lot of interference and diffraction. As we have
already seen in detail, the wave hypothesis is the only one able to account for
the data obtained from the double slit experiment.
On the other hand, an equally abundant harvest of experiences strongly
demonstrated the particle nature of light - and we saw it in the previous one
with black body radiation, photoelectric effect and Compton effect. The
logical conclusion to which these experiments led was one and only one:
light of any color, therefore of any wavelength, was constituted by a flow of
particles, all moving in vacuum at the same speed. Each one had its own
momentum, a quantity that in Newtonian physics was given by the product of
mass for speed and that for photons is equal to the energy divided by c. The
momentum is important (as can be testified by whoever passed in front of a
speed camera with the car), because its total in a system is preserved, that is it
does not change even after several impacts. In the classic case is known the
example of two billiard balls colliding: even if the speeds change, the sum of
the momentum before and after the collision remains constant. Compton's
experiment has shown that this conservation is also valid for how many of
light, which in this regard behave like cars and other macroscopic objects.
We should stop for a moment to clarify the difference between waves and
particles. First of all, the second ones are discrete. Take two glasses, one full
of water and one full of fine sand. Both substances change shape and can be
poured, so that, on a not too thorough examination, they seem to share the
same properties. But the liquid is continuous, smooth, while the sand is made
up of discreet, accounting grains. A teaspoon of water contains a certain
volume of liquid, a teaspoon of sand can be quantified in the number of
grains. Quantum mechanics re-evaluates discrete quantities and integers, in
what would seem a return to Pythagorean theories. A particle, in every
instant, has a defined position and moves along a certain trajectory, unlike a
wave, which is "smeared" in space. The particles, moreover, have a certain
energy and momentum, which can transfer to other particles in collisions. By
definition, a particle cannot be a wave and vice versa.
Back to us. Physicists of the twenties were bewildered in front of that strange
beast, half particle and half wave, which some called wavicle (wave, wave,
and particle, particle contraction). Despite the consolidated evidence in favor
of wave nature, experiment after experiment the photons turned out to be
concrete objects, able to collide with each other and with electrons. Atoms
emitted one when they came out from an excited state, releasing the same
amount of energy, E=hf, brought by the photon itself. The story took an even
more surprising turn with the entry of a young French physicist, the aristocrat
Louis-Cesar-Victor-Maurice de Broglie, and his memorable doctoral thesis.
The de Broglie, whose ranks included only high-ranking officers, diplomats
or politicians, were very hostile to Louis' inclinations. The old duke, his
grandfather, called science "an old woman who seeks the admiration of
young men. So the scion, for the sake of compromise, undertook his studies
to become a naval officer, but continued to experiment in his spare time,
thanks to the laboratory he had installed in the ancestral mansion. In the navy
he made a name for himself as an expert in broadcasting and after the death
of the old duke he was allowed to take leave to devote himself full-time to his
true passion.
De Broglie had thought at length about Einstein's doubts about the
photoelectric effect, which was incompatible with the undulating nature of
light and which corroborated the photon hypothesis. While rereading the
work of the great scientist, the young Frenchman came up with a very
unorthodox idea. If light, which would seem to be a wave, exhibits particle-
like behavior, perhaps in nature the opposite can also happen. Maybe
particles, all particles, show in certain occasions wave-like behaviors. In de
Broglie's words: "[Bohr atom theory] led me to hypothesize that also
electrons could be considered not only particles, but also objects to which it
was possible to assign a frequency, that is a wave property".
Some years before, a doctoral student who had chosen this risky hypothesis
for his thesis would have been forced to move to the theology faculty of some
obscure university of Molvania Citeriore. But in 1924 everything was
possible, and de Broglie had a very special fan. The great Albert Einstein was
called by his perplexed Parisian colleagues as external consultant to examine
the candidate's thesis, which he found very interesting (perhaps he also
thought "but why didn't I have this idea?"). In his report to the Parisian
commission, the Master wrote: "De Broglie has lifted a flap of the great veil".
The young Frenchman not only obtained the title, but a few years later he was
even awarded the Nobel Prize for physics, thanks to the theory presented in
his thesis. His greatest success was having found a relationship, modeled on
Planck's one, between the classical momentum of an electron (mass for
speed) and the wavelength of the corresponding wave. But wave of what? An
electron is a particle, for God's sake, where is the wave? De Broglie was
talking about "a mysterious phenomenon with periodicity characters" that
happened inside the particle itself. It seems unclear, but he was convinced
about it. And although his interpretation was smoky, the underlying idea was
brilliant.
In 1927 two American physicists working at the prestigious Bell Laboratories
of AT&T, New Jersey, were studying the properties of vacuum tubes
bombarding with electron flows various types of crystals. The results were
quite strange: the electrons were coming out from the crystals according to
preferred directions and seemed to ignore others. The Bell Lab researchers
were not able to do it, until they found out about de Broglie's crazy
hypothesis. Seen in this new point of view, their experiment was only a
complex version of Young's one, with the double slit, and the behavior of the
electrons showed a well known property of the waves, that is the diffraction!
The results would have made sense if it was assumed that the wavelength of
the electrons was really related to their momentum, just as de Broglie
predicted. The regular lattice of the atoms in the crystals was the equivalent
of the cracks in Young's experiment, that was more than a century before.
This fundamental discovery of "electronic diffraction" corroborated de
Broglie's thesis: electrons are particles that behave like waves, and it is also
quite easy to verify it.
We will come back in a little while on diffraction issue, remaking our now
familiar double slit experiment with electrons, that will give us an even more
disconcerting result. Here we only observe that this property is responsible
for the fact that the various materials behave as conductors, insulators or
semiconductors, and it is at the base of transistors invention. Now we have to
get acquainted with another protagonist - maybe the real superhero of the
quantum revolution.
A strange mathematics
Werner Heisenberg (1901-1976) was the prince of the theorists, so
disinterested in laboratory practice that he risked flunking his thesis at the
University of Munich because he did not know how batteries worked.
Fortunately for him and physics as a whole, he was also promoted. There
were other not easy moments in his life. During the First World War, while
his father was at the front as a soldier, the scarcity of food and fuel in the city
was such that schools and universities were often forced to suspend classes.
And in the summer of 1918 young Werner, weakened and undernourished,
was forced together with other students to help the farmers on a Bavarian
farm harvest.
With the end of the war, in the first years of the twenties we find him in the
shoes of the young prodigy: pianist of high level, poured in the classical
languages, skillful skier and alpinist, as well as mathematician of rank lent to
the physics. During the lessons of the old teacher Arnold Sommerfeld, he met
another promising young man, Wolfgang Pauli, who would later become his
closest collaborator and his fiercest critic. In 1922 Sommerfeld took the 21-
year-old Heisenberg to Göttingen, then the beacon of European science, to
attend a series of lectures dedicated to the nascent quantum atomic physics,
given by Niels Bohr himself. On that occasion the young researcher, not at all
intimidated, dared to counter some statements of the guru and challenge at
the root his theoretical model. After this first confrontation, however,
between the two was born a long and fruitful collaboration, marked by
mutual admiration.
From that moment Heisenberg devoted himself body and soul to the enigmas
of quantum mechanics. In 1924 he spent some time in Copenhagen to work
directly with Bohr on the problems of radiation emission and absorption.
There he learned to appreciate the "philosophical attitude" (in Pauli's words)
of the great Danish physicist. Frustrated by the difficulties to make concrete
the atomic model of Bohr, with its orbits put in that way who knows how, the
young man was convinced that there must be something wrong at the root.
The more he thought about it, the more it seemed to him that those simple,
almost circular orbits were a surplus, a purely intellectual construct. To get
rid of them, he began to think that the very idea of orbit was a Newtonian
residue that had to be done without.
The young Werner imposed himself a fierce doctrine: no model had to be
based on classical physics (so no miniature solar systems, even if they are so
cute to draw). The way to salvation was not intuition or aesthetics, but
mathematical rigor. Another of his conceptual dikats was the renunciation of
all entities (such as orbits, in fact) that could not be measured directly.
Measurable in the atoms were the spectral lines, witness of the emission or
absorption of photons by the atoms as a result of jumping between the
electron levels. So it was to those net, visible and verifiable lines
corresponding to the inaccessible subatomic world, that Heisenberg turned
his attention. To solve this diabolically complicated problem, and to find
relief from hay fever, in 1925 he retired to Helgoland, remote island in the
North Sea.
His starting point was the so-called "correspondence principle", enunciated
by Bohr, according to which quantum laws had to be transformed without
problems into the corresponding classical laws when applied to sufficiently
large systems. But how big? Enough to allow to neglect the Planck constant h
in the relative equations. A typical object of the atomic world has mass equal
to 10-27 kg; let's consider that a grain of dust barely visible to the naked eye
can weigh 10-7 kg: very little, but it is still greater by a factor
100000000000000, that is 1020, one followed by twenty zeros. So the
atmospheric dust is clearly in the domain of classical physics: it is a
macroscopic object and its motion is not affected by the presence of factors
dependent on Planck's constant. The basic quantum laws apply naturally to
the phenomena of the atomic and subatomic world, while it loses sense to use
them to describe phenomena related to aggregates larger than atoms, as the
dimensions grow and quantum physics gives way to the classical laws of
Newton and Maxwell. The foundation of this principle (as we will repeat
several times) is that the strange and unpublished quantum effects
"correspond" directly to the classical concepts of physics as you leave the
atomic field to enter the macroscopic one.
Driven by Bohr's ideas, Heisenberg redefined in quantum field the most banal
notions of classical physics, as the position and velocity of an electron, so
that they were in correspondence with the Newtonian equivalents. But he
soon realized that his efforts of reconciliation between two worlds led to the
birth of a new, and bizarre, "algebra of physics".
We all learned in school the so-called commutative property of
multiplication, that is, the fact that, given any two numbers a and b, their
product does not change if we exchange them between them; in symbols:
a×b=b×a. It is obvious, for example, that 3×4 =4×3=12. In Heisenberg's time,
however, the existence of abstract numerical systems in which the
commutative property does not always apply and it is not said that a × b is
equal to b × a. To well think about it, examples of non commutative
operations are found also in nature. A classic case are rotations and tilts (try
to perform two different rotations on an object like a book, and you will find
examples where the order in which they happen is important).
Heisenberg had not studied in depth the most advanced frontiers of pure
mathematics of his time, but he could avail himself of the help of more
experienced colleagues, who immediately recognized the type of algebra
contained in his definitions: they were nothing but multiplications of matrices
with complex values. So-called "matrix algebra" was an exotic branch of
mathematics, known for about sixty years, which was used to treat objects
formed by rows and columns of numbers: matrices. Matrix algebra applied to
Heisenberg's formalism (called matrix mechanics) led to the first concrete
arrangement of quantum physics. His calculations brought to sensible results
for the energies of states and atomic transitions, that is electron level jumps.
When the matrix mechanics was applied not only to the hydrogen atom case,
but also to other simple microscopic systems, it was discovered that it worked
wonderfully: the solutions obtained theoretically agreed with the
experimental data. And from those strange manipulations of matrices came
out also a revolutionary concept.
The first steps of the uncertainty principle
The main consequence of non-commutationality turned out to be this. If we
indicate with x the position along an axis and p the momentum, always along
the same axis, of a particle, the fact that xp is not equal to px implies that the
two values cannot be measured simultaneously in a defined and precise way.
In other words, if we get the exact position of a particle we disrupt the system
in such a way that it is no longer possible to know its momentum, and vice
versa. The cause of this is not technological, it is not our instruments that are
inaccurate: it is nature that is made this way.
In the formalism of matrix mechanics we can express this idea in a concise
way, which has always driven the philosophers of science crazy: "The
uncertainty relative to the position of a particle, indicated with Δx, and that
relative to the quantity of motion, Δp, are linked by the relation: ΔxΔp≥ħ/2,
where ħ=h/2π". Said in words: "the product of the uncertainties relative to the
position and the momentum of a particle is always greater or equal by a
number equal to the Planck constant divided by four times pi". This implies
that if we measure position with great precision, thus making Δx as small as
possible, we automatically make Δp arbitrarily large, and vice versa. You just
can't have it all in life: we have to give up knowing exactly either the
position, or the momentum.
Starting from this principle we can also deduce the stability of Bohr atom,
that is to demonstrate the existence of a fundamental state, a lower orbit
under which electron cannot descend, as it happens in Newtonian mechanics.
If the electron would get closer and closer to the nucleus until it would hit us,
the uncertainty about its position would be less and less, that is as scientists
say Δx "would tend to zero". For Heisenberg principle Δp would become
arbitrarily large, that is the electron energy would grow more and more. It is
shown that there is a state of equilibrium where the electron is "enough" well
located, with Δx different from zero, and where the energy is the minimum
possible, given the corresponding Δp value.
The physical ratio of uncertainty principle is easier to understand if we put
ourselves in another order of reasoning, à la Schrödinger, and we examine a
property (not quantum) of electromagnetic waves, well known in the
telecommunication field. Well yes, we are going back to the waves. The
matrix mechanics seemed at first sight the only rigorous way to penetrate in
the meanders of the atomic world. But luckily, while physicists were about to
become algebra experts, in 1926 another, more attractive solution to the
problem appeared.
The most beautiful equation in history
We already met Erwin Schrödinger in chapter 1. As you remember, at one
point he took a vacation in Switzerland to study in peace, and the result of
this period was an equation, Schrödinger's equation, which brought
considerable clarity to the quantum world.
Why is it so important? Let's go back to Newton's first law, the F=ma that
governs the motion of apples, planets and all macroscopic objects. It tells us
that the force F applied to an object of mass m produces an acceleration (i.e. a
change of speed) to and that these three quantities are linked by the
relationship written above. Solving this equation allows us to know the state
of a body, for example a tennis ball, at every moment. The important thing, in
general, is to know F, from which the position x and the velocity v at the
instant t are derived. The relationships between these quantities are
established by differential equations, that use concepts of infinitesimal
analysis (invented by Newton himself) and that sometimes are difficult to
solve (for example when the system is composed by many bodies). The shape
of these equations is however rather simple: they are the calculations and the
applications to become complicated.
Newton amazed the world demonstrating that joining the law of universal
gravitation to that one of motion, applied to the force of gravity, the simple
elliptical orbits and the laws of planetary motion that Kepler had enunciated
for the solar system were obtained. The same equation is able to describe the
motions of the Moon, of an apple falling from the tree and of a rocket fired in
orbit. This equation, however, is not able to solve explicitly if four or more
bodies are involved, all subject to gravitational interaction; in this case it is
necessary to proceed by approximations and/or with the help of numerical
methods (thanks to calculators). It's a nice case: at the base of the laws of
nature there is an apparently simple formula, but it reflects the incredible
complexity of our world. Schrödinger's equation is the quantum version of
F=ma. If we solve it, however, we do not find ourselves with the position and
velocity values of the particles, as in the Newtonian case.
On that vacation in December 1925 Schrödinger brought with him not only
his mistress, but also a copy of de Broglie's doctoral thesis. Very few, at the
time, had noticed the ideas of the Frenchman, but after Schrödinger's reading
things changed quickly. In March 1926, this forty years old professor from
the University of Zurich, who until then had not had a particularly brilliant
career and that by the standards of the young physicist of that time was
almost decrepit, made known to the world his equation, that dealt with the
motion of electrons in terms of waves, based on de Broglie's thesis. For his
colleagues he was much more digestible than the cold abstractions of matrix
mechanics. In Schrödinger's equation a new fundamental quantity appeared,
the wave function, indicated with Ψ, that represents its solution.
Since long before the official birth of quantum mechanics, physicists were
used to treat (classically) various cases of material waves in the continuous,
such as sound waves that propagate in the air. Let's see an example with
sound. The quantity that interests us is the pressure exerted by the wave in the
air, which we indicate with Ψ(x,t). From the mathematical point of view this
is a "function", a recipe that provides the value of the wave pressure
(intended as a variation of standard atmospheric pressure) at each point x of
space and at each instant t. The solutions of the relative classical equation
naturally describe a wave that "travels" in space and time, "perturbing" the
motion of air particles (or water, or an electromagnetic field or other). The
waves of the sea, tsunamis and beautiful company are all forms allowed by
these equations, which are of the "differential" type: they involve quantities
that change, and to understand them you need to know the mathematical
analysis. The "wave equation" is a type of differential equation that if solved
gives us the "wave function" Ψ(x,t) - in our example the air pressure that
varies in space and time when a sound wave passes.
Thanks to de Broglie's ideas, Schrödinger immediately understood that
Heisenberg's complex technicalities could be rewritten in order to obtain
relations very similar to the old equations of classical physics, in particular
those of waves. From the formal point of view, a quantum particle was
described by the function Ψ(x,t), which Schrödinger himself called "wave
function". With this interpretation and applying the principles of quantum
physics, i.e. solving Schrödinger's equation, it was possible in principle to
calculate the wave function of each particle then known, in almost all cases.
The problem was that nobody had any idea what this quantity represented.
As a consequence of the introduction of Ψ, we can no longer say that "at
instant t the particle is in x"; instead we have to say that "the motion of the
particle is represented by the function Ψ(x,t), which gives the amplitude Ψ at
time t in point x". The precise position is no longer known. If we see that Ψ is
particularly large at a point x and almost nothing elsewhere, we can say that
the particle is "about in position x". Waves are objects scattered in space, and
so is the wave function. We observe that these are reasoning with hindsight,
because in the years we are considering no one, including Schrödinger, had
very clear ideas about the true nature of the wave function.
Here, however, is a twist, which is one of the most surprising aspects of
quantum mechanics. Schrödinger realized that his wave function was, as one
would expect from a wave, continuous in space and time, but that to make the
accounts come back he had to assume different numbers as values from the
real ones. And this is a big difference with normal waves, mechanical or
electromagnetic, where values are always real. For example, we can say that
the crest of an oceanic wave rises from the average sea level for 2 meters
(and therefore we must expose the red flag on the beach); or even worse that
a tsunami 10 meters high is coming, and therefore we must evacuate the
coastal areas in a hurry. These are real values, concrete, measurable with
various instruments, and we all understand their meaning.
The quantum wave function, on the contrary, assumes values in the field of
so-called "complex numbers".15 For example, it may happen that at point x
the amplitude is equal to a "stuff" that is written 0.3+0.5i, where i=√-1. In
other words, the number i multiplied by itself gives the result -1. An object
like the one written above, formed by a real number added to another real
number multiplied by i, is defined as a complex number. Schrödinger's
equation always involves the presence of i, a number that plays a
fundamental role in the equation itself, which is why the wave function
assumes complex values.16
This mathematical complication is an unavoidable step on the road to
quantum physics and is another indication that the wave function of a particle
is not directly measurable: after all, real numbers are always obtained in
experiments. In Schrödinger's vision, an electron is a wave for all purposes,
not different from a sound or marine wave. But how is it possible, since a
particle must be located in a defined point and cannot occupy entire portions
of space? The trick is to superimpose various waves in such a way that they
are erased almost everywhere except at the point we are interested in. A
combination of waves, therefore, can represent an object well located in
space, which we would be tempted to call "particle" and that comes up every
time the sum of the waves gives rise to a particular concentration in a point.
In this sense a particle is an "anomalous wave", similar to that phenomenon
caused at sea by the overlapping of waves, which creates a great perturbation
capable of overturning boats.
An eternal adolescent
At what point is quantum theory after the discoveries of Heisenberg,
Schrödinger, Bohr, Born and colleagues? There are the probabilistic wave
functions on the one hand and the uncertainty principle on the other, which
allows to maintain the particle model. The crisis of duality "a bit wave a bit
particle" seems to be solved: electrons and photons are particles, whose
behavior is described by probabilistic waves. As waves they are subject to
interference phenomena, bringing the docile particles to appear where they
are expected to do so, obeying the wave function. How they get there is not a
problem that makes sense to pose. This is what they say in Copenhagen. The
price to pay for success is the intrusion in physics of probability and various
quantum oddities.
The idea that nature (or God) plays dice with subatomic matter did not appeal
to Einstein, Schrödinger, de Broglie, Planck and many others. Einstein in
particular was convinced that quantum mechanics was only a stage, a
provisional theory that would sooner or later be replaced by another,
deterministic and causal one. In the second part of his career the great
physicist made several ingenious attempts to circumvent the problem of
uncertainty, but his efforts were frustrated one after the other by Bohr -
supposedly to his malicious satisfaction.
We must therefore close the chapter suspended between the triumphs of
theory and a certain feeling of uneasiness. At the end of the twenties quantum
mechanics was now an adult science, but still susceptible to growth: it would
be deeply revised several times, until the forties.
Chapter 6
Quantum




A sHeisenberg
     if to confirm its supernatural appearance, the quantum theory of
              and Schrödinger literally worked miracles. The hydrogen
     atom model was clarified without the need of Keplerian conceptual
crutches: the orbits were replaced by "orbital", sons of the new and
indeterminate wave functions. The new quantum mechanics turned out to be
a formidable tool in the hands of physicists, who became more and more
good to apply Schrödinger's equation to various fields and atomic and
subatomic systems, of increasing complexity. As Heinz Pagels said, "the
theory released the intellectual energies of thousands of young researchers in
all industrialized nations. In no other occasion has a series of scientific ideas
had such fundamental consequences on technological development; its
applications continue to shape the political and social history of our
civilization".
But when we say that a theory or model "works", what exactly do we mean?
That it is mathematically able to make predictions about some natural
phenomenon, comparable with experimental data. If the predictions and
measurements accumulated in our experiences collimate, then the theory
works "ex post", i.e. it explains why a certain fact happens, which was
previously unknown to us.
For example we could ask ourselves what happens to throw two objects of
different mass from a high point, say the tower of Pisa. Galileo's
demonstration and all the experiments performed afterwards show that,
unless small corrections due to air resistance, two serious objects of different
mass falling from the same height reach the ground at the same time. This is
one hundred percent true in the absence of air, as has been spectacularly
demonstrated on the Moon live on television: the feather and hammer
dropped by an astronaut arrived at exactly the same time.2 The original and
profound theory that has been confirmed in this case is Newtonian universal
gravitation, combined with its laws of motion. Putting together the relative
equations, we can predict what will be the behavior of a falling body subject
to the force of gravity and calculate how long it will take to reach the ground.
It is child's play to verify that two objects of different masses dropped from
the same height must reach the ground at the same time (if we neglect air
resistance).
But a good theory must also make us able to predict the evolution of
phenomena not yet observed. When the ECHO satellite was launched in
1958, for example, gravitation and Newtonian laws of motion were used to
calculate in advance what trajectory it would follow, note the thrust force and
other important corrective factors, such as wind speed and earth rotation. The
predictive power of a law depends, of course, on how much control you can
exercise over the various factors involved. Under every point of view,
Newton's theory has proved to be of extraordinary success, both in ex post
verifications and in the predictive field, when applied to its wide range of
relevance: not too high speeds (much smaller than light) and not too small
scales (much larger than atomic).
Newton does not write e-mail
Let's ask ourselves now if quantum mechanics is able to explain (ex post) the
world around us and if it can be used to predict the existence of phenomena
not yet observed - thus becoming indispensable in the discovery of new and
useful applications. The answer to both questions is a convinced yes. The
quantum theory has passed countless experimental tests, in both senses. It is
grafted on the theories that preceded it, Newtonian mechanics and Maxwell's
electromagnetism, every time the quantum trademark, i.e. Planck's famous
constant h, is not so small that it can be ignored in the calculations. This
happens when masses, dimensions and time scales of objects and events are
comparable to those of the atomic world. And since everything is made up of
atoms, we should not be surprised that these phenomena sometimes raise
their heads and make their presence felt even in the macroscopic world,
where humans and their measuring instruments are.
In this chapter we will explore the applications of this strange theory, which
will seem related to witchcraft. We will be able to explain all the chemistry,
from the periodic table of the elements to the forces that hold together the
molecules of the compounds, of which there are billions of types. We will
then move on to verify how much quantum physics affects practically every
aspect of our life. If it is true that God plays dice with the universe, he has
however managed to control the results of the game in order to give us the
transistor, the tunnel diode, lasers, X-rays, synchrotron light, radioactive
markers, scanning tunnel effect microscopes, superconductors, positron
emission tomography, superfluids, nuclear reactors, atomic bombs, magnetic
resonance imaging and microchips, just to give a few examples. You
probably do not have superconductors or scanning microscopes, but you
certainly have hundreds of millions of transistors scattered around the house.
Your life is touched in a thousand ways by technologies possible thanks to
quantum physics. If we had a strictly Newtonian universe, we wouldn't be
able to surf the Internet, we wouldn't know what software is and we wouldn't
have seen the battles between Steve Jobs and Bill Gates (or rather, they
would have been billionaire rivals in another sector, such as railways).
Perhaps we would have saved ourselves some problems that afflict our time,
but for sure we would not have the tools to solve many others.
The consequences in other scientific fields, beyond the boundaries of physics,
are equally profound. Erwin Schrödinger, to whom we owe the elegant
equation that governs the entire quantum world, wrote in 1944 a prophetic
book entitled What is life,4 in which he made a hypothesis about the
transmission of genetic information. The young James Watson read this
remarkable work and was stimulated to investigate the nature of genes. The
rest of the story is well known: together with Francis Crick, in the 1950s
Watson discovered the double helix of DNA, starting the revolution of
molecular biology and, later, the unscrupulous genetic engineering of our
times. Without the quantum revolution we would not have been able to
understand the structure of the simplest molecules, let alone the DNA, which
is the basis of all life.5 Moving into more frontier and speculative areas, those
who could offer the solution to problems such as the nature of the mind,
consciousness and self-perception, or at least this is what some daredevil
theoretical physicists who dare face the field of cognitive sciences claim.
Quantum mechanics continues to shed light on chemical phenomena to this
day. In 1998, for example, the Nobel Prize in Chemistry was awarded to two
physicists, Walter Kohn and John Pople, for discovering powerful
computational techniques for solving quantum equations that describe the
shape and interactions of molecules. Astrophysics, nuclear engineering,
cryptography, materials science, electronics: these branches of knowledge
and others, including chemistry, biology, biochemistry and so on, would be
impoverished without quanta. What we call computing would probably be
little more than the design of archives for paper records. What would this
discipline do without Heisenberg's uncertainty and Born's probabilities?
Without quantum we would not have been able to really understand the
structure and properties of the chemical elements, which had been sitting well
in the periodic table for half a century. It is the elements, their reactions and
their combinations that give life to everything around us and to life itself.
A game with Dmitri Mendeleev
Chemistry was a serious and vital science, like physics, long before quantum
theory entered the scene. It was through the chemical research of John Dalton
that in 1803 the reality of atoms was confirmed, and Michael Faraday's
experiments led to the discovery of their electrical properties. But nobody
understood how things really were. Quantum physics provided chemistry
with a sophisticated and rational model capable of explaining the detailed
structure and behavior of atoms, as well as a formalism to understand the
properties of molecules and realistically predict their formation. All these
successes were possible thanks to the probabilistic nature of the theory.
We know, chemistry is not a popular subject, although it is the basis of much
of modern technology. All those symbols and numbers written below confuse
ideas. But we are convinced that if you let yourself be led in this chapter to
explore the logic behind the discipline, you will be won over. The discovery
of the mysteries of the atom is one of the most compelling mystery novels in
the history of mankind.
The study of chemistry, as everyone knows, starts from the periodic table of
the elements, which adorns the walls of hundreds of thousands of classrooms
around the world. His invention was a true scientific feat, accomplished
largely by the surprisingly prolific Dmitri Ivanovič Mendeleev (1834-1907).
A leading figure of czarist Russia, Mendeleev was a great scholar, able to
write four hundred books and articles, but he was also interested in the
practical applications of his work, so much so that he left contributions on
subjects such as the use of fertilizers, cheese production in cooperatives,
standardization of weights and measures, customs tariffs in Russia and
shipbuilding. Politically radical, he divorced his wife to marry a young
student at the art institute. Judging by period photos, he liked to keep his hair
long.
Mendeleev's diagram comes from ordering the elements by increasing atomic
weight. We observe that by "element" we mean a simple substance,
consisting of atoms all of the same type. A block of graphite and a diamond
are made of the same substance, carbon, even if the atoms have different
structure: in one case they give rise to a dark and useful material to make
pencils, in the other to objects useful to make themselves beautiful in the eyes
of the girlfriend or to pierce the hardest of metals. Vice versa water is not an
element but a chemical compound, because it is composed of oxygen and
hydrogen atoms held together by electrical forces. Even the compound
molecules obey Schrödinger's equation.
The "atomic weight" that we mentioned before is nothing but the
characteristic mass of each atom. All atoms of the same substance, let's say
oxygen, have the same mass. Ditto for nitrogen atoms, which are a little less
heavy than oxygen atoms. There are very light substances, like hydrogen, the
lightest of all, and other very heavy substances, like uranium, hundreds of
times more massive than hydrogen. The atomic mass is measured for
convenience with a special unit of measure and it is indicated with the letter
M,8 but here it is not important to go into details of the single values. Rather
we are interested in the list of elements in increasing order of atomic weight.
Mendeleev realized that the position of an element in this list had a clear
correspondence with its chemical properties: it was the key to penetrate the
mysteries of matter.
Mr. Pauli enters the scene
Physical systems tend to organize themselves so that they remain in the state
of least energy. In atoms, quantum rules and Schrödinger's equation provide
the allowed configurations in which electrons can move, the orbital ones,
each of which has its own energy level. The last step to unravel all the
mysteries of the atom starts from here, and it is an extraordinary and
surprising discovery: each orbital has space only for a maximum of two
electrons! If this is not the case, the physical world would be very different.
This is where the genius of Wolfgang Pauli comes in, this irascible and
legendary scientist who represented in a certain way the consciousness of his
generation, the man who terrorized colleagues and students, that sometimes
signed himself "The Wrath of God" and that we will hear more often about
(see also note 1 in chapter 5).
To avoid electron piles in s1, in 1925 Pauli hypothesized that the so-called
exclusion principle was valid, according to which two electrons inside an
atom can never be in the same quantum state simultaneously. Thanks to the
exclusion principle there is a criterion to put the particles in the right place as
you go up to heavier and heavier atoms. By the way, the same principle is
what prevents us to pass through walls, because it assures us that the
electrons in our body cannot be in the same state as the ones in the wall and
they must remain separated by large spaces, like houses in the Big Prairies.
Professor Pauli was a short, chubby, creative and hypercritical gentleman,
endowed with a sarcastic spirit that was terror and delight of his colleagues.
He certainly did not lack modesty, since he wrote an article as a teenager in
which he explained the theory of relativity to physicists in a convincing way.
His career was punctuated by lightning-fast jokes, among which we
remember for example: "Ah, so young and already so unknown!", "This
article does not even have the honor of being wrong", "Your first formula is
wrong, but in any case the second is not derived from the first", "I am not
bothered by the fact that you are slow in understanding, but that you write
articles faster than you think". To be the subject of one of these arrows was
certainly an experience that could reduce anyone's size.
An author who remained anonymous wrote this poem about Pauli, as it is
reported by George Gamow in his book Thirty years that upset physics:
The principle of exclusion was one of Pauli's greatest scientific achievements.
In practice he gave us back chemistry, allowing us to understand why the
periodic table of elements is made that way. Yet in its basic formulation is
very simple: never two electrons in the same quantum state. It is not done,
verboten! This little rule guides us in the construction of bigger and bigger
atoms and in the understanding of their chemical properties.
We repeat the two golden rules, by Pauli, that we must follow as we go along
the periodic table: 1) electrons must always occupy different quantum states
and 2) electrons must be configured to have the minimum possible energy.
This second rule, incidentally, applies in other areas and it explains why
bodies subject to gravity fall down: an object on the ground has less energy
than one on the fourteenth floor. But let's go back to helium. We said that the
two electrons in s1 are consistent with the experimental data. Is this not a
violation of the exclusion principle ? Actually no, because thanks to another
great idea of Pauli, maybe the most brilliant one, the spin comes on the scene
(in addition to what we will say now, for a deeper discussion of this topic see
Appendix).
The electrons, in a certain way, rotate on themselves in a relentless way, like
microscopic spinning tops. This rotation, from quantum point of view, can
happen in two ways, that are called up (up) and down (down). That is why
two electrons can easily stay in the same orbital 1s and respect Pauli's diktat:
as long as they have opposite spin they can find themselves in different
quantum states. Here it is done. Now however we have exhausted 1s, we
cannot overload it with a third electron.
The helium atom saturates the orbital 1s and it is ok, because there is no more
space available: the two electrons are sitting tight and nice and quiet. The
consequence of this structure is just the chemical inactivity of helium, that
has no desire to interact with other atoms. Hydrogen instead has only one
electron in 1s and it is hospitable to other particles that want to join it, as long
as they have the opposite spin; in fact the arrival of an electron from another
atom (as we will see soon) is the way hydrogen creates a bond with other
elements.16 In chemistry language, the hydrogen orbital is called
"incomplete" (or even that its electron is "odd"), while the helium one is
"complete", because it has the maximum number of electrons expected: two,
of opposite spin. The chemistry of these two elements, therefore, is different
like day from night.
Now we are ready to face lithium and its three electrons. Where do we put
them ? Two can fill 1s, as for helium, and the third one we put it necessarily
in the lowest energy level among those available. As you can see in figure
6.5, we have four choices: 2s, 2px, 2py and 2pcs. The chemical properties of
lithium depend only on this last electron, because the ones in 1s complete it,
making it inert. We know that 2s is slightly less energetic than the various 2p,
so the choice is forced and we put it there. In the end it turns out that lithium
is chemically almost identical to hydrogen, as it too has only one active
electron in the outer orbital (first in 1s, now in 2s). Slowly we are revealing
the secret code that leads to the periodic table formation.
The heavier atoms are formed filling one after the other the orbital 2s and 2p.
Beryllium has the fourth electron in one of the 2p (because of a minimum
repulsive action of the other electron in 2s). All the 2p, that as already said
are drop shaped, have the same energy, so an electron can end up in a
quantum "mixture" of these three states. Let us always remember, while we
continue to fill the orbital, that each one contains at most two electrons, one
with spin up and the other with spin down. The Sequence of the heaviest
atoms proceeds smoothly: beryllium (Z=4), boron (Z=5), carbon (Z=6),
nitrogen (Z=7), oxygen (Z=8), fluorine (Z=9) and neon (Z=10). Neon is
exactly eight steps after helium. What is the situation at this point? 1s, 2s,
2px, 2py and 2pcs are all complete, each one with its good two electrons, so
we find ourselves in the case of helium, with the ten neon electrons that are
quiet in their orbital. Here is explained the reason of the magic number eight
and the periodicity in Mendeleev's table.
Summing up, hydrogen and lithium are chemically similar because they both
have only one electron in the outer orbital (respectively 1s and 2s). Helium
and neon are chemically similar because all their electrons are in complete
orbitals (respectively 1s and 1s, 2s, 2px, 2py and 2pz), which implies stability
and chemical non reactivity. It is the incomplete levels, in fact, to stimulate
the atoms to activity. The mystery of the suspects in the American-style
confrontation that gathered in secret bands, observed for the first time by
Mendeleev, is almost completely cleared up.
Now it is up to sodium, Z=11, with eleven positive charges in the nucleus and
eleven electrons that somehow we have to fix. We have already seen that the
first ten complete all the first five orbitals, so we must turn to 3s and place
there the solitary electron. Voilà: sodium is chemically similar to hydrogen
and lithium, because all three of them have only one electron in the outer
orbital, that is s type. Then there is magnesium, that adds to the electron in 3s
another one shared (in quantum sense) between 3px, 3py and 3pcs.
Continuing to fill 3s and 3p, we realize that the configurations exactly
replicate the ones already seen for 2s and 2p; after other eight steps we arrive
to the argo, another noble and inert gas that has all the complete orbitals: 1s,
2s, 2p, 3s and 3p - all contain their good two opposite spin electrons. The
third row of the periodic table replicates exactly the second one, because the s
and p orbitals of its atoms fill in the same way.
In the fourth row, however, things change. We start quietly with 4s and 4p
but then we come across the 3d. The orbits of this type correspond to even
higher order solutions of Schrödinger's equation and they fill up in a more
complicated way, because at this point there are a lot of electrons. So far we
have neglected this aspect, but the negatively charged particles interact with
each other, rejecting each other because of the electric force, which
complicates the calculations a lot. It is the equivalent of the Newtonian
problem of n bodies, that is similar to the situation in which you have to find
the motions of a solar system whose planets are close enough to each other to
feel the respective gravitational influence. The details of how it is possible to
reach a solution are complex and are not relevant for what we will say here,
but it is enough to know that everything works in the end. The 3d orbital are
mixed with the 4p, so you can find place for a maximum of ten electrons
before they complete. That is why the period eight changes in eighteen
(18=8+10) and then it changes again for similar reasons in thirty-two. The
physical bases of the chemical behavior of the ordinary matter, and therefore
also of the substances that allow life, are now clear. The mystery of
Mendeleev is no longer such.
to the details.
Chapter 7
Einstein and Bohr




W eunderstand,
     have overcome the obstacle of the last chapters and we have come to
               thanks to Wolfgang Pauli, the intimate essence of chemistry
      (and therefore of biology) and why we will never be able, with high
probability, to pass through a granite table with our hand, which also consists
mostly of empty space. The time has come to go even deeper into the sea of
quantum mysteries and deal with the fundamental dispute between Niels
Bohr and Albert Einstein. We will hear some good things about it.
Scientific creativity, ideally, is an eternal battle between intuition and the
need for incontrovertible proof. Today we know that quantum science
successfully describes an incredible number of natural phenomena and even
has applications with very concrete economic spin-offs. We have also
realized that the microscopic, i.e. quantum, world is strange, but strange
indeed. Today's physics does not even seem related to the one that has made
so much progress from the seventeenth century to the beginning of the
twentieth century. There has been a real revolution.
Sometimes scientists (including us), in an attempt to get the results of their
research to the general public, resort to metaphors. They are in a sense
daughters of the frustration of those who cannot explain what they saw in the
laboratory in a "sensible" way, because this would involve a revision of our
way of thinking: we must try to understand a world whose direct and daily
experience is precluded us. Surely our language is inadequate to describe it,
since it has evolved for other purposes. Let's assume that a race of aliens from
the planet Zyzzx has collected and analyzed certain macroscopic data from
planet Earth and now knows everything about the behavior of the crowds -
from stadium games to concerts in the square, from marching armies to mass
protests ended with the crowd running away from police charges (which only
happens in backward countries, eh). After collecting information for a
century, the Zyzzxians have a substantial catalog of collective actions at their
disposal, but they know nothing about the abilities and aspirations of men,
reasoning, love, passion for music or art, sex, humor. All these individual
characteristics are lost in the molasses of collective actions.
The same happens in the microscopic world. If we think about the fact that a
flea's cilia hair contains a thousand billion billion atoms, we understand why
macroscopic objects, elements of our daily experience, are useless in the
understanding of microscopic reality. Like the individuals in the crowd,
atoms blend into tangible bodies - though not entirely, as we will see later. So
we have two worlds: a classic one, elegantly described by Newton and
Maxwell, and a quantum one. Of course, at the end of the day the world is
only one, in which quantum theory can successfully deal with atoms and
merge into the classical one in the macroscopic case. The equations of
Newton and Maxwell are approximations of the quantum ones. We review in
a systematic way some disconcerting aspect of these last ones.
Four shocks in a row
1. Let's start with radioactivity and start with one of the most beloved
creatures of physicists, the muon. It is a particle that weighs about two
hundred times more than an electron, of which it has the same charge. It
seems to be punctiform, that is it has negligible size, and it seems to turn on
itself. When this heavy copy of the electron was discovered, it caused a
bewilderment in the scientific community, so much that the great Isaac Isidor
Rabi came out with the famous exclamation "Who ordered this?".1 But the
muon has a basic difference with the electron: it is unstable, that is subject to
radioactive decay, and it disintegrates after about two microseconds. For the
precision, its "half-life", that is the time in which on average half of the
muons of a thousand group disappear, is equal to 2,2 microseconds. This on
average, because if we fixate on a single muon (we can also give it a nice
name, like Hilda, Moe, Benito or Julia) we do not know when its life will
end. The event "decay of the muon X" is random, not deterministic, as if
someone rolled a couple of dice and decided the events based on the
combinations of numbers that came out. We must abandon classical
determinism and reason in probabilistic terms, to understand the foundations
of the new physics.
2. In the same order of ideas we have the phenomenon of partial reflection,
which you will remember from chapter 3. It was thought that light was a
wave, subject to all the phenomena of other waves like those of the sea,
including precisely reflection, until Planck and Einstein discovered quanta,
particles that behave like waves. If a quantum of light, that is a photon, is
shot against a window, it is reflected or diffracted; in the first case it
contributes to give a weak image of who is admiring the exposed clothes, in
the second one it illuminates the elegant mannequins. The phenomenon is
described mathematically by a wave function, which being a wave can be
partially reflected or diffracted. The particles, instead, are discrete, so they
must be either reflected or refracted, in total.
3. We now come to the already well-known experiment with the double slit,
whose noble history dates back to Thomas Young who denies Newton on the
corpuscular theory of light and sanctions the triumph of the undulatory one.
We have seen it for photons, but in reality all particles behave in the same
way: muons, quarks, W bosons and so on. All of them, if subjected to an
experiment similar to Young's one, seem to behave like waves.
Let's see for example the electron case, that as the photon can be emitted
from a source and shot against a screen where two slits were made, beyond
which we placed a detector screen (with special circuits instead of
photocells). We perform the experiment firing the electrons slowly, for
example one per hour, in order to be sure that the particles pass one at a time
(without "interfering" between them). As we have discovered in chapter 4,
repeating the measurements many times in the end we find ourselves with a
set of electron locations on the screen that form an interference figure. The
single particle also seems to "know" if there are one or two open slits, while
we do not even know which way it passed. If we close one of the two slits,
the interference figure disappears. And it disappears even if next to the slits
we place an instrument that records the electrons passing from that point.
Ultimately, the interference figure appears only when our ignorance about the
path followed by the single electron is total.
4. As if that was not enough, we have to deal with other disturbing properties.
Take for example the spin. Perhaps the most disconcerting aspect of the story
is given by the fact that the electron has fractional spin value, equal to 1/2,
that is its "angular momentum" is ħ/2 (see Appendix). Moreover, an electron
is always aligned to any direction along which we choose to measure its spin,
which if we take into account the orientation can be +1/2 or -1/2, or as we
said above up (up) or down (down).2 The icing on the cake is this: if we
rotate an electron in the space of 360°, its wave function from Ψe becomes -
Ψe, that is it changes sign (in the Appendix there is a special paragraph
explaining how this happens). None of this happens for objects in the
classical world.
Take for example a drumstick. If the percussionist of a band, in the mood for
performances, starts to twirl it between his fingers between shots, thus
turning it 360°, the object returns to have exactly the same spatial orientation.
If instead of the drumstick there was an electron, after the turn we would find
ourselves with a particle of opposite sign. Definitely we are in unfamiliar
territories. But does it really happen or is it just mathematical sophistication?
As always, we can measure only the probability of an event, the square of the
wave function, so how do we know if the minus sign appears or not? And
what does "minus sign" mean in this case, what does it have to do with
reality? Are they not elucubrations of philosophers contemplating the navel at
the expense of public funds for research?
Nein! says Pauli. The minus sign implies that, taken two electrons at random
(remember that they are all identical), their joint quantum state must be such
to change sign if the two are exchanged. The consequence of all this is the
Pauli exclusion principle, the exchange force, the orbital filling, the periodic
table, the reason why hydrogen is reactive and helium inert, the whole
chemistry. This fact is the basis of the existence of stable matter, conductors,
neutron stars, antimatter and about half of U.S. gross domestic product.
But why so much strangeness?
Let's go back to point 1 of the previous paragraph and the dear old muon,
elementary particle that weighs two hundred times the electron and lives two
millionths of a second, before decaying and transforming into an electron and
neutrinos (other elementary particles). Despite these bizarre features, they
really exist and at Fermilab we hope one day to build an accelerator that will
make them run at high speed.
The decay of muons is basically determined by quantum probability, while
Newtonian physics is on the sidelines watching. At the time of its discovery,
however, not everyone was willing to throw overboard a concept as beautiful
as the "classical determinism", the perfect predictability of phenomena
typical of classical physics. Among the various attempts to save the
salvageable there was the introduction of the so-called "hidden variables".
Let's imagine that inside the muon is hidden a time bomb, a tiny mechanism
with its good little clock connected to a dynamite charge, that blows up the
particle, even if we do not know when. The bomb must be, therefore, a
mechanical device of Newtonian type but submicroscopic, not observable
with our current technologies but still ultimately responsible for the decay:
the hands of the clock arrive at noon, and hello muon. If when you create a
muon (usually after shocks between other types of particles) the time of
detonation is established at random (perhaps in ways related to the creation of
the hidden mechanism), then we have replicated in a classic way the
apparently indeterministic process that is observed. The small time bomb is
an example of hidden variable, name given to various similar devices that
could have the important effect of modifying quantum theory in a
deterministic sense, to sweep away the "senseless" probability. But as we will
see soon, after eighty years of disputes we now know that this attempt has
failed and the majority of contemporary physicists now accept the strange
quantum logic.
The hidden things
In the 1930s, well before the quarks were discovered, Einstein gave vent to
his deep opposition to the Copenhagen interpretation with a series of attempts
to transform quantum theory into something more like Newton and
Maxwell's old, dear, sensible physics. In 1935, with the collaboration of the
two young theoretical physicists Boris Podolsky and Nathan Rosen, he pulled
the ace up his sleeve.8 His counter-proposal was based on a mental
experiment (Gendankenexperiment, we have already talked about it) that in
its intentions would have to demonstrate with great force the clash between
the quantum world of probability and the classical world of real objects, with
defined properties, and would also establish once and for all where the truth
was.
This experiment became famous under the name of "EPR paradox", from the
initials of the authors. Its purpose was to demonstrate the incompleteness of
quantum mechanics, in the hope that one day a more complete theory would
be discovered.
What does it mean to be "complete" or "incomplete" for a theory? In this case
an example of "completion" is given by the hidden variables seen before.
These entities are exactly what they say they are: unknown factors that
influence the course of events and that can (or maybe not) be discovered with
a more thorough investigation (remember the example of the time bomb
inside the muon). In reality they are common presences in everyday life. If
we flip a coin, we know that the two results "head" and "cross" are equally
likely. In the history of humanity, since the invention of the coins, this
gesture will have been repeated thousands of billions of times (perhaps even
by Brutus to decide whether to kill or not Caesar). Everyone agrees that the
result is unpredictable, because it is the result of a random process. But are
we really sure? Here is where the hidden variables jump out.
One is, just to start with, the force used to throw the coin in the air, and in
particular how much of this force results in the vertical motion of the object
and how much in its rotation on itself. Other variables are the weight and size
of the coin, the direction of the micro-currents of air, the precise angle with
which it hits the table when it falls and the nature of the surface of impact (is
the table made of wood? Is it covered with a cloth?). In short, there are a lot
of hidden variables that influence the final result.
Now let's imagine to build a machine able to throw the coin always with the
same force. We always use the same specimen and we perform the
experiment in a place protected from currents (maybe under a glass bell
where we created the vacuum), making sure that the coin always falls near
the center of the table, where we also have control over the elasticity of the
surface. After having spent, say, $17963.47 for this contraption, we are ready
to turn it on. Go! Let's make five hundred flips and get five hundred times
head! We have managed to control all the elusive hidden variables, which are
now neither variables nor hidden, and we have defeated the case!
Determinism is the master! Newtonian classical physics applies, therefore, to
coins as much as to arrows, bullets, tennis balls and planets. The apparent
randomness of a coin toss is due to an incomplete theory and a large number
of hidden variables, which in principle are all explicable and controllable.
On what other occasions do we see randomness at work in everyday life?
Actuarial tables are used to predict how long a certain population will live (of
humans, but also of dogs and horses), but the general theory of the longevity
of a species is certainly incomplete, because many complex hidden variables
remain, including the genetic predisposition to contract certain diseases, the
quality of the environment and nutrition, the probability of being hit by an
asteroid and many others. In the future perhaps, if we exclude occasional
accidents, we will be able to reduce the degree of uncertainty and predict
better until we enjoy the company of grandparents or cousins.
Physics has already tamed some theories full of hidden variables. Consider
for example the theory of "perfect gases" or "ideals", which provides a
mathematical relationship between pressure, temperature and volume of a gas
in a closed environment under ordinary environmental conditions. In the
experiments we find that increasing the temperature also increases the
pressure, while increasing the volume the pressure drops. All this is elegantly
summarized in the formula pV=nRT (in words: "the product of pressure by
volume is equal to temperature multiplied by a constant R, all multiplied by
the number n of gas molecules"). In this case the hidden variables are an
enormity, because the gas is formed by a colossal number of molecules. To
overcome this obstacle, we define the temperature statistically as the average
energy of a molecule, while pressure is the average force with which the
molecules hit a fixed area of the walls of the container that contains them.
The law of perfect gases, an incomplete time, thanks to statistical methods
can be precisely justified by the motions of "hidden" molecules. With similar
methods, in 1905 Einstein succeeded in explaining the so-called Brownian
motion, i.e. the apparently random movements of dust suspended in water.
These "random walks" of the grains were an insoluble mystery before
Einstein understood that "hidden" collisions with water molecules came into
play.
Perhaps it was because of this precedent that Einstein naturally thought that
quantum mechanics was in reality incomplete and that its probabilistic nature
was only apparent, the result of the statistical average made on still unknown
entities: hidden variables. If it had been possible to unveil this internal
complexity, it would have been possible to go back to Newtonian physics,
deterministic and to re-enter the classical reality underlying the whole. If for
example the photons guarded a hidden mechanism in order to decide if to be
reflected or refracted, the randomness of their behavior when they collide
with the showcase would be revealed only apparent. Knowing the operation
of the mechanism, we would be able to foresee the motions of the particles.
We put immediately the things in clear: all this has never been never been
discovered. Some physicists like Einstein were disgusted, on a philosophical
level, by the idea that randomness was an intrinsic, fundamental characteristic
of our world and they hoped to recreate in some way the Newtonian
determinism. If we knew and controlled all the hidden variables, they said,
we could design an experiment whose result would be predictable, as the core
of determinism claims.
On the contrary, quantum theory in Bohr and Heisenberg's interpretation
rejected the existence of hidden variables and embraced instead causality and
indeterminacy, as fundamental characteristics of nature, whose effect was
explicitly exhibited at microscopic level. If we cannot predict the outcome of
an experiment, we certainly cannot predict the future course of events: as a
natural philosophy, determinism has failed.
So let's ask ourselves if there is a way to discover the existence of hidden
variables. First, however, let us see what Einstein's challenge consisted of.
Bohr's response to EPR
The key to solving the EPR paradox lies in the fact that the two particles A
and B, however far apart, were born at the same time from the same event
and are therefore related in an entanglement. Their positions, momentum,
spin and so on are always indefinite, but whatever value they assume, they
always remain linked to each other. If for example we obtain a precise
number for the speed of A, we know that the speed of B is the same, only
opposite in direction; same for position and spin. With the act of measuring
we make a wave function collapse that until then included in itself all
possible values for the properties of A and B. Thanks to entanglement,
however, what we learn in our laboratory on Earth allows us to know the
same things about a particle that could be on Rigel 3, without touching it,
observing it or interfering with it in any way. Even B's wave function
collapsed at the same time, even if the particle is sailing light years away.
All this does not refute in any concrete way Heisenberg's uncertainty
principle, because when we measure the momentum of A we continue to
disturb its position irreparably. EPR's objection focused on the fact that a
body must have precise values of momentum and position, even if we are not
able to measure them together. How did you eventually decide to replicate
Bohr? How did he counterattack?
After weeks of passion, the Master came to the conclusion that the problem
did not exist. The ability to predict the speed of B through the measurement
of A does not imply at all that B has such speed: until we measure it, there is
really no point in making assumptions of this kind. Similarly for the position,
which makes no sense to talk about before measurement. Bohr, to which
Pauli and other colleagues later added Pauli and others, argued in practice
this: poor Einstein did not get rid of the classical obsession with the
properties of bodies. In reality, no one can know whether or not such an
object has certain properties until we disturb it with measurement. And
something that cannot be known may well not exist. You can't count the
angels that can balance on the head of a pin, so they may not exist either. The
principle of location in all this is not violated: you will never be able to send
an instant message of good wishes from Earth to Rigel 3 if you have
forgotten your wedding anniversary.
On one occasion Bohr went so far as to compare the quantum revolution with
the one triggered by Einstein, relativity, after which space and time found
themselves with new and bizarre qualities. The majority of physicists,
however, agreed that the former had much more radical effects on our
worldview.
Bohr insisted on one aspect: two particles, once they became entangled as a
result of a microscopic event, remain entangled even if they move away at
sidereal distances. Looking at A, we influence the quantum state that includes
A and B. The spin of B, therefore, is determined by the size of that of A,
wherever the two particles are located. This particular aspect of the EPR
paradox would have been better understood thirty years later, thanks to the
enlightening work of John Bell to which we will return. For now, know that
the key word is "non-locality", another version of Einstein's nosy definition:
"spectral action at a distance".
In classical physics, the state (A up, B down) is totally separate and distinct
from (A down, B up). As we have seen before, everything is determined by
the choice of the friend who packages the packages, and in principle the
evolution of the system is known by anyone who examines the initial data.
The two options are independent and opening the package only reveals which
one was chosen. From a quantum point of view, however, the wave function
that describes both A and B "entanglement" the options; when we measure A
or B, the whole function changes simultaneously in every place in space,
without anyone emitting observable signals that travel at speeds higher than
the speed of light. That's it. Nature works in this way.
This authoritarian insistence may perhaps silence the doubts of a freshman
physicist, but is it really enough to save our troubled philosophical souls?
Surely Bohr's "refutation" did not satisfy Einstein and colleagues at all. The
two contenders seemed to speak different languages. Einstein believed in
classical reality, in the existence of physical entities with well defined
properties, like electrons and protons. For Bohr, who had abandoned the
belief in an independent reality, the "demonstration" of incompleteness by the
rival was meaningless, because it was wrong just the way the other one
conceived a "reasonable" theory. Einstein asked one day one of our
colleagues: "But do you really believe that the Moon exists there only when
you look at it? If in this question we replace our satellite with an electron, the
answer is not immediate. The best way out is to bring up the quantum states
and the probabilities. If we ask ourselves what is the spin of a certain electron
emitted by a tungsten wire in an incandescent lamp, we know that it will be
up or down with equal probability of 50%; if nobody measures it, it does not
make sense to say that the spin is oriented in a certain direction. About
Einstein's question, better to gloss. Satellites are much larger than particles.
But what kind of world do we live in?
We have dedicated this chapter to one of the most enigmatic aspects of
quantum physics, the exploration of the micro-world. It would be already
traumatic if it was a new planet subject to new and different laws of nature,
because this would undermine the very foundations of science and
technology, the control of which makes us rich and powerful (some of us,
let's say). But what is even more disconcerting is that the strange laws of the
micro-world give way to the old and banal Newtonian physics when the
dimensional scale grows to the level of tennis balls or planets.
All the forces known to us (gravitation, electromagnetism, strong and weak
interaction) are of local type: they decrease with distance and propagate at
speeds strictly not higher than the speed of light. But one day a certain Mr.
Bell came out, who forced us to consider a new type of interaction, non-local,
which propagates instantly and does not weaken with increasing distance.
And he also proved that it exists, thanks to the experimental method.
Does this force us to accept these inconceivable non-local distance actions?
We are in a nice philosophical quagmire. As we understand how different the
world is from our daily experience, we experience a slow but inevitable
change of perspective. The last half century has been for quantum physics the
accelerated version of Newton and Maxwell's long series of successes in
classical physics. Certainly we have reached a deeper understanding of
phenomena, since quantum mechanics is at the basis of all sciences
(including classical physics, which is an approximation) and can fully
describe the behavior of atoms, nuclei and subnuclear particles (quarks and
leptons), as well as molecules, solid state, the first moments of life in our
universe (through quantum cosmology), the great chains at the base of life,
the frenetic developments of biotechnology, perhaps even the way human
consciousness operates. It has given us so much, yet the philosophical and
conceptual problems it brings with it continue to torment us, leaving us with
a feeling of unease mixed with great hopes.
contemplated the strange lands of Bell.
Chapter 8
Quantum Physics in Present Times




I nofthetheprevious chapters we have relived the stories of the brilliant scientists
              20th century who built quantum physics among a thousand
   difficulties and battles. The journey has led us to follow the birth of
fundamental ideas that seem revolutionary and anti-intuitive to those who
know well classical physics, born with Galileo and Newton and refined over
three centuries. In front of the many people there were many problems about
the very nature of the theory, for example about the validity and limits of the
Copenhagen interpretation (which still today some people challenge and try
to deny). The majority of researchers, however, realized that they had in their
hands a new and powerful tool to study the atomic and subatomic world and
did not have too many scruples to use it, even if it did not match their ideas in
the philosophical field. Thus new areas of research in physics were created,
still active today.
Some of these disciplines have completely changed our way of life and
greatly increased our potential to understand and study the universe. The next
time one of you or a member of your family enters an MRI apparatus
(hopefully never), consider this fact: while the machine buzzes, spins,
advances the couch and makes sounds like a supernatural orchestra, while on
a monitor in the control room a detailed image of your organs is formed, you
are experimenting in an essential way the effects of applied quantum physics,
a world of superconductors and semiconductors, spin, quantum
electrodynamics, new materials and so on. Inside a resonance machine you
are, literally, inside an EPR-type experiment. And if the diagnostic apparatus
is instead a PET, a positron emission tomography, know that they are
bombarding you with antimatter!
Overcoming the Copenhagen stalemate, quantum mechanics techniques have
been used to address many practical and specific problems in areas that were
previously considered intractable. Physicists have begun to study the
mechanisms that govern the behavior of materials, such as how phase
changes from solid to liquid to gas, or how matter responds to magnetization,
heating and cooling, or why some materials are better conductors of
electricity than others. All this falls largely within the so-called "condensed
matter physics". To answer the above questions it would be sufficient to
apply Schrödinger's equation, but over time more refined mathematical
techniques have been developed, thanks to which we have been able to
design new and sophisticated toys, such as transistors and lasers, on which
the entire technology of the digital world we live in today is based.
Most of the applications of colossal economic value derive from quantum
electronics or condensed matter physics and are "non-relativistic", i.e. they do
not depend on Einstein's theory of narrow relativity because they involve
phenomena that occur at lower speeds than light. The same Schrödinger's
equation is non-relativistic, and in fact it provides an excellent approximation
of the behavior of electrons and atoms at not high speed, which is true both
for the external electrons of the atoms, chemically active and involved in the
bonds, and for the electrons moving inside solids.1
But there are open questions that involve phenomena that occur at speeds
close to the speed of light, for example: what holds the nucleus together?
what are the really fundamental building blocks of matter, the real elementary
particles? how do you reconcile narrow relativity with quantum theory? We
must then enter a faster world, different from the world of physics of
materials. To understand what happens in the nucleus, place where mass can
be converted into energy as in the case of radioactive decay (fission or
fusion), we must consider quantum phenomena that occur at speeds close to
that of light and go into the rough terrain of the theory of narrow relativity.
Once we understand how things work, we can take the next step towards the
most complicated and deep general relativity, which deals with the force of
gravity. And finally face the problem of problems, that remained open until
the end of the Second World War: how to describe in a complete way the
interactions between a relativistic electron (i.e. fast) and light.
The marriage between quantum physics and narrow relativity
Einstein's theory is the correct version of the concept of relative motion,
generalized at speeds even close to those of light. Basically, it postulates
general principles related to the symmetry of physical laws2 and has
profound implications on particle dynamics. Einstein discovered the
fundamental relationship between energy and momentum, which differs
radically from the Newtonian one. This conceptual innovation is at the basis
of the changes that must be made to quantum mechanics to reformulate it in a
relativistic sense.3
A question then arises spontaneously: what arises from the marriage of these
two theories? Something extraordinary, as we will see shortly.
E = mc2
The equation E=mc2 is very famous. You can find it everywhere: on t-shirts,
in the graphic design of the television series Ai confini della realtà, in certain
trademarks and in endless cartoons of the "New Yorker". It has become a sort
of universal emblem of all that is scientific and "intelligent" in contemporary
culture.
Rarely, however, do some television commentators bother to explain its true
meaning, except to summarize it in the expression "mass is equivalent to
energy". Nothing could be more wrong: mass and energy are actually
completely different. Photons, just to give an example, do not have mass but
can easily have energy.
The real meaning of E=mc2 is actually very specific. Translated in words, the
equation tells us that "a resting particle of mass m has an energy E whose
value is given by the relation E=mc2". A massive particle, in principle, can
spontaneously transform itself into other lighter particles in a process (decay)
that involves the release of energy.4 Nuclear fission, in which a heavy atomic
nucleus breaks giving rise to lighter nuclei, as in the case of U235 (uranium-
235), therefore produces a lot of energy. Similarly, light nuclei such as
deuterium can combine in the nuclear fusion process to form helium,
releasing also in this case large amounts of energy. This happens because the
mass of the sum of the two starting nuclei is greater than that of the helium
nucleus. This process of mass-energy conversion was simply
incomprehensible before Einsteinian relativity, yet it is the engine that makes
the Sun work and is the reason why life, beauty, poetry exist on Earth.
When a body is in motion, the famous formula E = mc2 must be modified, as
Einstein himself knew well.5 Actually, the static formula (body with zero
momentum) is deduced from the dynamic formula (body with non-zero
momentum) and its form is not the one everyone knows, but this one:
E2 = m2c4
It would seem to be a matter of goat's wool, but in reality there is a big
difference, as we will illustrate now. To get the energy of a particle we have
to take the square root of the two members of this equation and we find the
familiar E=mc2. But not only!
It is a simple arithmetic fact: numbers have two square roots, one positive
and one negative. The square root of 4, for example, is both √4=2 and √4=-2,
because we know that 2×2=4 but also (-2)×(-2)=4 (we know that two
negative numbers multiplied together result in a positive number). So also the
equation written above, solved with respect to E, gives us two solutions:
E=mc2 and E=-mc2.
Here is a nice enigma: how can we be sure that the energy derived from
Einstein's formula is always positive? Which of the two roots should we
take? And how does nature know?
At first the problem didn't seem too serious, but it was stolen as a useless and
silly sophistication. Those who knew it were in no doubt, the energy was
always either nothing or positive, and a particle with negative energy was an
absurdity that should not even be contemplated, on pain of ridicule.
Everybody was too busy playing with Schrödinger's equation, that in its
original form applies only to slow particles, like the external electrons of
atoms, molecules and solid bodies in general. In its non-relativistic version,
the problem does not arise because the kinetic energy of moving particles is
always given by a positive number. And common sense leads us to think that
the total energy of a mass particle at rest is mc2, that is it is positive too. For
these reasons, physicists of the time did not even consider the possibility to
consider the negative square root and labeled that solution as "spurious", that
is "not applicable to any physical body".
But let's suppose for a moment that instead there are particles with negative
energy, corresponding to the solution with the minus sign in front and that is
to say with an energy at rest equal to -mc2. If they were to move, the energy
would increase in modulus and thus become even less as the momentum
increases.6 In possible collisions with other particles would continue to lose
energy, as well as due to the emission of photons, and therefore their speed
would increase more and more, getting closer to that of light. The process
would never stop and the particles in question would have an energy that
would tend to become infinite, or rather infinitely negative. After a while the
universe would fill up with these oddities, particles that radiate energy
constantly sinking deeper and deeper into the abyss of negative infinity.7
The square root century
It is truly remarkable that one of the fundamental engines of physics in the
20th century is the problem of "getting the right square root". With hindsight,
the construction of quantum theory can be seen as the clarification of the idea
of "square root of a probability", the result of which is Schrödinger's wave
function (whose square, we remember, provides the probability of finding a
body in a certain place and at a certain time).
The simple root extraction can give rise to real oddities. For example we
obtain objects called imaginary and complex numbers, which have a
fundamental role in quantum mechanics. We have already met a notorious
example: i = √-1, the root of minus one. Quantum physics must necessarily
involve i and his brothers because of its mathematical nature and there is no
way to avoid them. We have also seen that the theory foresees oddities such
as entanglement and mixed states, which are "exceptional cases",
consequences due to the fact that everything is based on the square root of
probability. If we add and subtract these roots before elevating everything to
the square we can obtain term cancellations and therefore a phenomenon like
interference, as we have seen from Young's experiment onwards. These
oddities challenge our common sense as much as, and perhaps more so, the
square root less one would have seemed absurd to the cultures that preceded
us, like the ancient Greeks. At the beginning they did not even accept
irrational numbers, so much so that according to a legend Pythagoras
condemned his disciple who had demonstrated the irrationality of √2, that is
the fact that this number cannot be written in the form of a fraction, a ratio
between two integers. At the time of Euclid things had changed and the
irrationality accepted, but as far as we know the idea of imaginary numbers
was never contemplated (for more details see note 15 of chapter 5).
Another sensational result obtained by the physics of the last century can be
considered a consequence of this simple mathematical structure, namely the
concept of spin and spinor. A spinor is in practice the square root of a vector
(see Appendix for more details). A vector, which is perhaps more familiar to
you, is like an arrow in space, with defined length and direction, representing
quantities such as, for example, the speed of a particle. Taking the square root
of an object with spatial direction seems a strange idea and in fact has strange
consequences. When you rotate a spinor 360° it does not return equal to
itself, but becomes less itself. The calculations tell us then that if we
exchange the position of two identical electrons with spin 1/2, the wave
function of the state that includes the position of both must change sign:
Ψ(x,y) = - Ψ(y,x). The Pauli exclusion principle comes from this very fact:
two identical particles with spin 1/2 cannot have the same state, because
otherwise the wave function would be identically null. We have already seen
that the principle applied to electrons leads us to exclude the presence of
more than two particles on an orbital, one of which has spin up and the other
spin down. Hence the existence of a repulsive "exchange force" between two
particles with spin 1/2 that do not want at all costs to be in the same quantum
state, which includes being in the same place at the same time. Pauli's
exclusion principle governs the structure of the periodic table of elements and
it is a very visible and fundamental consequence of the incredible fact that
electrons are represented as square roots of vectors, that is spinors.
Einstein's formula that binds mass and energy gives us another situation in
which the physics of the twentieth century had to compare with square roots.
As we said, at the beginning everybody ignored the problem neglecting the
negative solutions in the study of particles as photons or mesons. A meson is
a particle with zero spin, while the photon has spin equal to 1, and their
energy is always positive. In the case of electrons, that have spin 1/2, it was
necessary to find a theory that integrate quantum mechanics and narrow
relativity; and in this field we were face to face with negative energy states,
that here give us the opportunity to know one of the most important figures of
physics of the twentieth century.
Paul Dirac
Paul Dirac was one of the founding fathers of quantum physics, author,
among other things, of the sacred book of this discipline: The Principles of
Quantum Mechanics.8 It is a reference text that deals coherently with the
theory according to the Bohr-Heisenberg school of thought and combines
Schrödinger's wave function with Heisenberg's matrix mechanics. It is a
recommended reading for those who want to go deeper into the subject, even
if it requires knowledge at the level of the first years of university.
Dirac's original contributions to 20th century physics are of paramount
importance. Noteworthy, for example, is his theoretical proposal on the
existence of magnetic monopoles, the magnetic field equivalent of electric
charges, point sources of the field itself. In Maxwell's classical theory this
possibility is not contemplated, because magnetic fields are considered
generated only by charges in motion. Dirac discovered that monopoles and
electric charges are concepts not independent but related through quantum
mechanics. His theoretical speculations combined the new physics with a
branch of mathematics called topology, which in those years was gaining
importance. Dirac's theory of magnetic monopolies had a strong resonance
also from a strictly mathematical point of view and in many ways anticipated
the conceptual framework that was later developed by string theory. But his
fundamental discovery, one of the deepest in 20th century physics, was the
relativistic theory of the electron.
In 1926 the young Dirac was looking for a new equation to describe the spin
1/2 particles, that could overcome Schrödinger's one and take into account
the restricted relativity. To do this he needed the spinors (the square roots of
the vectors, remember) and he had to assume that the electron had mass. But
in order to get back to relativity, he discovered that he had to double the
spinors compared to the non-relativistic situation, therefore he had to assign
two spinors to each electron.
In broad lines a spinor is composed by a couple of complex numbers that
represent respectively the root of the probability to have spin up or spin
down. In order to make this tool fall in the narrow relativity range, Dirac
found a new relation where four complex numbers were needed. This is
known today, you may have imagined, as Dirac's equation.
Dirac's equation takes the square roots really seriously, in the maximum
generality. The two starting spinors represent two electrons, one spin up and
one spin down, that without taking into account relativity have positive
energy, so from E2=m2c4 we use only the solution E=+mc2. But if instead
we take relativity into account we need two other spinors, to which we
associate the negative solution of Einstein's equation E=-mc2. So they have
negative energy. Dirac himself could not do anything about it, because this
choice was obligatory if we wanted to take into account the symmetry
requirements of restricted relativity, essentially referred to the correct
treatment of the motions. It was frustrating.
The problem of negative energy is inextricably present in the very heart of
narrow relativity and therefore cannot be ignored. Dirac noticed how it
became more and more thorny as he was progressing in his quantum electron
theory. The minus sign cannot be ignored saying it is a not admissible
solution, because the theory that results from the combination of quantum
and relativity allows particles to have both positive and negative energy. We
could settle the matter stating that an electron of negative energy is only one
of the many "allowed quantum states", but this would lead to the disaster: the
hydrogen atom, and all the ordinary matter, would not be stable. An electron
of positive energy mc2 could emit photons with energy equal to 2mc2,
become a particle of negative energy -mc2 and begin the descent into the
abyss of the less infinite (as the momentum increases the negative energy
modulus would increase quickly).9 The universe would not be stable if
negative energy states really exist. These new solutions with the minus sign
in front were a real thorn in the side of the nascent theory.
However, Dirac had a brilliant idea to solve the problem. As we have seen,
Pauli's exclusion principle states that two electrons cannot have exactly the
same quantum state at the same time: if one is already in a certain state, like
for example in an atomic orbital, nobody else can occupy that place (of
course we must take into account also the spin, therefore in a state with
certain characteristics of location and motion two electrons can live together,
one with spin up and the other with spin down). Dirac had the idea to extend
it to the vacuum: also the vacuum is actually full of electrons, that occupy all
the negative energy states. These problematic states in the universe are
therefore all occupied by two electrons, one spin up and the other spin down.
In this configuration, the positive energy electrons of the atoms could not
emit photons and find themselves in a negative energy state, because they
would not find any free and thanks to Pauli's principle the action would be
forbidden to them. With this hypothesis the vacuum would become analogous
to a giant inert atom, like the one of a noble gas, with all the orbital full, that
is with all the negative energy states occupied, for any amount of motion.
The supersymmetry
The calculation of vacuum energy continues to get worse if we stick muons,
neutrinos, tau, quarks, gluons, W and Z bosons, the brand-new Higgs boson -
i.e. all the particles that inhabit Mother Nature's zoo. Each of them provides a
piece of total energy, positive for fermions and negative for bosons, and the
result is always uncontrollable, i.e. infinite. Here the problem is not finding a
better way to do the calculations but a new general principle that tells us how
to derive the energy density of the vacuum in the universe. And so far we do
not have it.
However, there is a very interesting symmetry that, if implemented in a
"adjusted" quantum theory, allows us to calculate the cosmological constant
and to obtain a mathematically comforting result: zero. This symmetry is
given by a particular connection between fermions and bosons. To see it at
work we must introduce an extra imaginary dimension on the scene,
something that may have come out of the imagination of Lewis Carroll. And
this additional dimension behaves like a fermion: with a principle "à la Pauli"
prohibits more than one step in it.
Wherever we enter the new dimension, we must immediately stop (it is like
putting an electron in a quantum state: then we cannot add more). But when a
boson puts its foot in it, it is transformed in a fermion. And vice versa. If this
strange dimension really exists and if we enter in it, like Alice in Through the
mirror, we would see the electron transform in a boson called selectron and
the photon become a fermion called photon.
The new dimension represents a new type of physical symmetry,
mathematically consistent, called super symmetry, that associates to each
fermion a boson and vice versa.15 In practice, the particle zoo doubles. The
relationship between supersymmetric partners is similar to that between
matter and antimatter. As you may have guessed, the presence of these new
particles has a pleasant effect on the calculation of vacuum energy: the
positive values of the bosons cancel the negative values of the fermions
coming from the sea of Dirac, and the result is a nice zero. The cosmological
constant is identically null.
So supersymmetry solves the very concrete problem of vacuum energy?
Maybe so, but it is not very clear how. There are two obstacles. First, no
bosonic supersymmetric partner of the electron has been observed yet.16
Second, there is evidence that the cosmological constant is actually small but
different from zero. But the super symmetry, like all symmetries (think about
a perfectly spherical glass bowl), can be "broken" (just give a hammer to this
sphere). Physicists have a deep love for symmetry, which is always an
ingredient of our most appreciated and used theories. So many colleagues
hope that super symmetry really exists in nature and that there is also a
mechanism (similar to the hammering on the sphere) that can break it. If so,
we would observe its consequences only at very high energies, like the ones
we hope to obtain in colossal accelerators like LHC. According to the theory,
the partners of the photon electron, that is selectortron and photon, are very
heavy and we will be able to see their traces only when we will reach an
energy equal to a threshold value called ΛSUSY (SUSY is the abbreviation
of super symmetry).
Unfortunately, the breaking of super symmetry brings the problem of infinite
energy back on the scene. The vacuum energy density is given by the formula
seen above, i.e. Λ4SUSY/ħ3c3. If we suppose that this quantity is of the
order of magnitude of the maximum energies that can be obtained by the big
accelerators, from one thousand to ten thousand billion electron volts, then
we obtain a cosmological constant 1056 times bigger than the one observed.
It is a remarkable improvement compared to 10120 of before, but it is still a
beautiful problem. Supersymmetry, therefore, if directly applied to
calculations, does not solve the crisis of vacuum energy. We must try other
ways.
The holographic principle
Do we make any mistakes when counting the fish caught in the sea of Dirac?
Perhaps we are raising too many? After all we are adding up really small
creatures, negative energy electrons with very short wavelengths. The scale is
really microscopic, even if we set a high value for the threshold energy Λ.
Maybe these states are not really to be considered?
In the last ten years or so a new and radical hypothesis has emerged,
according to which until now we have always overestimated the number of
fish in the Dirac Sea, because these are not three-dimensional objects in a
three-dimensional ocean, but are part of a hologram. A hologram is a
projection of a certain space on another smaller one, as it happens when we
project a three-dimensional scene on a two-dimensional screen. According to
this hypothesis, everything that happens in three dimensions can be described
completely based on what happens on the screen, with one dimension less.
The Sea of Dirac, it follows, is not full of fish in the way we think, because
these are actually two-dimensional objects. In short, the negative energy
states are a mere illusion and the total energy of the vacuum is much less, so
much so that it is potentially compatible with the observed value of the
cosmological constant. We say "potentially" because holographic theory is
still a construction site and still has many open points.
This new idea comes from the field of string theory, in areas where
connections between holographic spaces can be established (the most defined
and original is given by the so-called Maldacena conjecture, or AdS/CFT).17
We will come back to this hypothesis, unrealistic or deep, in the next chapter;
however, the general sense seems to be that of a dreamer's logic.
The physics of condensed matter
Quantum theory allows interesting and very useful applications to materials
science. For a start, it has allowed us for the first time in history to really
understand what are the states of matter, how phase transitions work and
electrical and magnetic properties. As in the case of the periodic table of the
elements, quantum mechanics has largely repaid the investments made, both
from a theoretical and practical point of view, thanks to the birth of new
technologies. It has allowed the start of the so-called "quantum electronics"
and has revolutionized the life of all of us in ways that were once
inconceivable. Let's take a look at one of the main subsectors of this
discipline, which deals with the flow of electric current in materials.
The conduction band
When atoms join together to form a solid, they find themselves crushed a
short distance from each other. The wave functions of the external electrons,
located in the higher level occupied orbitals, start in a way to merge (while
the ones in the internal orbitals remain substantially undisturbed). The
external electrons can jump from one atom to another, so much that the
external orbital lose their identity and are no longer located around a specific
atom: they merge then in a collection of extended electronic states that is
called valence band.
Let's take for simplicity a crystalline material. The crystals present
themselves in many forms, whose properties have been catalogued in
detail.19 The electrons that begin to wander among the crystals have wave
functions with very low frequency in the valence band. Within this band, the
electrons are arranged following the Pauli exclusion principle: at most two
per level, one with spin up and the other with spin down. The states with very
low frequency are very similar to those of an electron free to move in space,
without interference with the crystalline lattice. These states have the lowest
energy level and fill up first. Always following the exclusion principle,
electrons continue to fill the following states until their quantum wavelengths
shorten, becoming comparable to the distance between atoms.
The electrons, however, are subject to deviations from the electromagnetic
field generated by the crystal lattice atoms, which behaves like a giant
interferometer of Young with a lot of cracks: one for each atom (the
analogous of the cracks are the lattice charges). The motion of these particles,
therefore, involves a colossal quantum interference.20 This intervenes just
when the wavelength of the electron is of the same order of magnitude
compared to the distance between the atoms: the states in this condition are
subject to destructive interference and therefore they cancel themselves.
The interference causes the formation of bands in the structure of energy
levels of electrons in solids. Between the minimum energy band, the valence
band, and the next one, called conduction band, there is a gap called energy
gap. From this band structure directly depends the electrical behavior of the
material. We can give three different cases.
1. Insulators. If the valence band is full and the energy gap before the
conduction band is consistent, the material is called insulation. Insulators,
such as glass or plastic, do not conduct electricity. A typical representative of
this category is an element that has almost all the orbitals full, such as
halogens and noble gases. In these circumstances, the electric current does
not flow because there is no space for electrons in the valence band to
"wander". So in order to move freely an electron should jump to the
conduction band, but if the energy gap is too much more this requires too
much energy.21
2. Conductors. If the valence band is not completely full, then the electrons
can move easily and enter new states of motion, which makes the material a
good conductor of electric currents. The typical member of this category has
a lot of electrons available to escape in the external orbital, which are not
complete; they are therefore elements that tend to give electrons in chemical
bonds, like alkali metals and some heavy metals. Among other things, it is
the light diffusion by these free electrons to cause the typical shiny
appearance of metals. As the conduction band fills up, the material becomes a
less and less efficient conductor, until it reaches the insulating condition.
3. Semiconductors. If the valence band is almost complete and the conduction
band has few electrons, the material should not be able to conduct much
current. But if the energy gap is not too high, say less than about 3 eV, it is
possible to force electrons without too much effort to jump in the conduction
band. In this case we are in presence of a semiconductor. The ability of these
materials to conduct electricity only in appropriate circumstances makes them
really useful, because we can manipulate them in various ways and have real
"electronic switches" available.
Typical semiconductors are crystalline solids such as silicon (the main
component of sand). Their conductivity can be modified drastically with the
addition of other elements as "impurities", with a technique called doping.
Semiconductors with few electrons in the conduction band are called "n" type
and usually are doped with the addition of atoms that give up electrons,
which go to "repopulate" the conduction band. Semiconductors with almost
full conduction band are called p type and usually are doped with the addition
of atoms that accept electrons coming from the valence band.
A p type material has "holes" in the valence band that look very similar to the
ones we met when we talked about the Dirac sea. In that case we saw that
these gaps were acting as positive particles; here something similar happens:
the holes, called gaps, take the role of positive charges and facilitate the
passage of electric current. A p-type semiconductor, therefore, is a kind of
miniature Dirac sea, created in a laboratory. In this case however the gaps
involve a lot of electrons and behave as if they were heavier particles,
therefore they are less efficient as current carriers than the single electrons.
Diodes and transistors
The simplest example of a mechanism that we can build thanks to
semiconductors is the diode. A diode acts as a conductor in one direction and
an insulator in the other. In order to build one, in general, a p-type material is
coupled with an n-type material to form a p-n junction. It does not take much
effort to stimulate the electrons of type n element to go beyond the junction
and end up in the valence band of type p element. This process, which
resembles the particle-anti-particle annihilation in the Dirac sea, makes the
current flow only one direction.
If we try to reverse the phenomenon we realize that it is difficult: removing
electrons from the conduction band we do not find one able to replace them
coming from p type material. In a diode, if we do not exaggerate with the
voltage (it is easy to burn a semiconductor with a too intense current), we can
easily make electricity flow in one direction only, and that is why this device
has important applications in electric circuits.
In 1947 John Bardeen and William Brattain, who worked at Bell Laboratories
in a group led by William Shockley, built the first "point contact" transistor.
It was a generalization of the diode, made by joining three semiconductors. A
transistor allows us to control the current flow as the voltage varies between
the three layers (called respectively collector, base and emitter) and basically
serves as a switch and amplifier. It is perhaps the most important mechanism
invented by man and earned Bardeen, Brattain and Shockley the Nobel Prize
in 1956.22
Profitable Applications
In the end what comes in our pockets? Schrödinger's fundamental equation,
which provides us with a way to calculate the wave function, was born as the
birth of pure reason: nobody imagined then that it would be the basis for the
operation of expensive machinery or would feed the economy of a nation.
But if applied to metals, insulators and (the most profitable) semiconductors,
this equation has allowed us to invent particular switches and control
mechanisms that are indispensable in equipment such as computers, particle
accelerators, robots that build cars, video games and airplanes able to land in
any weather.
Another favorite son of the quantum revolution is the ubiquitous laser, which
we find in supermarket checkouts, eye surgery, precision metallurgy,
navigation systems and the instruments we use to probe the structure of
atoms and molecules. The laser is like a special flashlight that emits photons
all of the same wavelength.
We could go on and on about the technological miracles that owe their
existence to the intuitions of Schrödinger, Heisenberg, Pauli and many others.
Let's see some of them. The first one that comes to our mind is the tunnel
effect microscope, able to reach magnifications thousands of times higher
than the most powerful electron microscope (which is in turn son of the new
physics, because it is based on some wave characteristics of electrons).
The tunnel effect is the quintessence of quantum theory. Imagine a metal
bowl placed on a table, inside of which there is a steel ball free to roll without
friction. According to classical physics the sphere is trapped in the bowl for
eternity, condemned to go up and down along the walls always reaching the
same height. Newtonian system to the highest degree. For the quantum
version of this configuration, we take an electron confined in a metal cage, in
whose walls circulates current with a voltage that the particle does not have
enough energy to counteract. So the electron approaches to a wall, it is
rejected to the opposite wall, it is still rejected, and so on to infinity, right?
No! Sooner or later, in the strange quantum world, the particle will be
outside.
Do you understand how disturbing this is? In the classic language we would
say that the electron has magically dug a tunnel and escaped from the cage, as
if the metal sphere, novella Houdini, had escaped from the prison of the
bowl. Applying to the problem Schrödinger's equation we make you enter the
probability: at every encounter between electron and wall there is a small
possibility that the particle goes beyond the barrier. Where does the necessary
energy go? Not relevant question, because the equation only tells us what is
the probability with which the electron is inside or outside. For a Newtonian
mind this doesn't make sense, but the tunnel effect has very tangible effects.
In the forties of the last century had become a fact that physicists used to
explain nuclear phenomena previously incomprehensible. Some parts of the
atomic nucleus manage, due to the tunnel effect, to cross the barrier that
keeps them bound and in doing so they break the original nucleus to form
smaller ones. This is fission, phenomenon at the base of nuclear reactors.
Another apparatus that puts this strange effect into practice is the Josephson
junction, a sort of electronic switch so named in honor of its brilliant and
bizarre inventor, Brian Josephson. This device operates at temperatures close
to absolute zero, where quantum superconductivity adds an exotic character
to the phenomena. In practice it is a super-fast and super-cool digital
electronic apparatus that takes advantage of the quantum tunnel effect. It
seems to come straight out of the pages of a book by Kurt Vonnegut, but it
really exists and is able to turn on and off thousands of billions of times per
second. In our era of increasingly powerful computers, this speed is a very
desirable feature. This is because the calculations are done on bits, that is on
units that can be zero or one, thanks to various algorithms that represent all
the numbers, add them up, multiply them, calculate derivatives and integrals,
and so on. All this is done by changing the value of certain electrical circuits
from zero (off) to one (on) several times, so you will understand that
speeding up this operation is of paramount importance. The Josephson
junction does it better than any other.
The tunnel effect applied to the microscopy has allowed us to "see" the single
atoms, for example in the fantastic architecture of the double helix that forms
the DNA, register of all the information that defines a living being. The
tunnel effect microscope, invented in the eighties of the last century, does not
use a light beam (as in the optical microscope) or an electron beam (as in the
standard electronic one). Its operation is based on a very high precision probe
that follows the contour of the object to be observed remaining at a distance
of less than one millionth of a millimeter. This gap is small enough to allow
the electric currents present on the surface of the object itself to overcome it
thanks to the tunnel effect and to stimulate a very sensitive crystal present in
the probe. Any variation in this distance, due to an atom "protruding", is
recorded and converted into an image by a special software. It is the
equivalent of the stylus of a turntable (does anyone remember?), which runs
through hills and valleys in a groove and turns them into Mozart's
magnificent music.
The tunnel effect microscope is also able to take atoms one by one and move
them elsewhere, which means we can build a molecule according to our
designs, putting the pieces together as if it were a model. It could be a new
very resistant material or an antiviral drug. Gerd Benning and Heinrich
Rohrer, who invented the tunnel effect microscope in an IBM laboratory in
Switzerland, were awarded the Nobel Prize in 1986, and their idea gave birth
to an industry with a billionaire turnover.
In the present and the near future there are two other potential revolutions:
nanotechnology and quantum computing. Nanotechnologies (where "nano" is
the prefix that is worth 10-9, which means "really very small") are the
reduction of mechanics, with motors, sensors and so on, at atomic and
molecular scale. We literally speak of Lilliputian factories, where a reduced
size a million times corresponds to an equal increase in operating speed.
Quantum production systems could use the most raw materials of all, atoms.
Our polluting factories would be replaced by compact, efficient machines.
Quantum computation, to which we will return later, promises to offer "a
system of information processing so powerful that by comparison traditional
digital computation will look like a smash compared to a nuclear reactor".
Chapter 9
The third millennium




A squantum
     we have seen on several occasions during the course of the book,
           science, despite its bizarre idea of reality, works very well, on
    an almost miraculous level. Its successes are extraordinary, profound and
of great weight. Thanks to quantum physics we have a true understanding of
what happens at molecular, atomic, nuclear and subnuclear level: we know
the forces and laws that govern the microworld. The intellectual depth of its
founders, at the beginning of the 20th century, has allowed us to use a
powerful theoretical tool that leads to surprising applications, those that are
revolutionizing our way of life.
From his cylinder, the quantum wizard has brought out technologies of
unimaginable scope, from lasers to tunnel effect microscopes. Yet some of
the geniuses who helped create this science, wrote the reference texts and
designed so many miraculous inventions are still in the throes of anguish. In
their hearts, buried in a corner, there is still the suspicion that Einstein was
not wrong and that quantum mechanics, in all its splendor, is not the final
theory of physics. Come on, how is it possible that probability is really part
of the basic principles that govern nature? There must be something that
escapes our attention. Gravity, for example, which has been neglected by the
new physics for a long time; the dream of arriving at a solid theory unifying
Einstein's general relativity and quantum mechanics has led some daredevil
to probe the depths of the fundamentals, where only the most abstract
mathematics provides a weak light, and to conceive string theory. But is there
perhaps something even deeper, a component missing in the logical
foundations of quantum physics? Are we trying to complete a puzzle that
lacks a piece?
Some people ardently hope to arrive soon to a super-theory that is reduced to
quantum mechanics in certain areas, as happens with relativity that engulf
Newtonian classical mechanics and returns value only in certain areas, that is
when the bodies in play move slowly. This would mean that modern quantum
physics is not the end of the line, because over there, hidden deep in the mind
of Nature, there is a definitive theory, better, able to completely describe the
universe. This theory would be able to face the frontiers of high energy
physics, but also the intimate mechanisms of molecular biology and
complexity theory. It could also lead us to discover completely new
phenomena, so far escaped from the eye of science. After all, our species is
characterized by curiosity and is unable to resist the temptation to probe this
exciting and surprising microworld as a planet orbiting a distant star. And
research is also a big business, if it is true that 60% of the American GDP
depends on technologies that have to do with quantum physics. So there are
good reasons to continue to explore the foundations of the building on which
we build our understanding of the world.
"Quantum phenomena challenge our primitive understanding of reality; they
force us to re-examine the very idea of existence," writes Euan Squires in the
preface to his book The Mystery of the Quantum World. "These are
important facts, because our beliefs about "what exists" certainly influence
the way we conceive our place in the world. On the other hand, what we
believe we are ultimately influences our existence and our actions".1 The late
Heinz Pagels in his essay The Cosmic Code speaks of a situation analogous
to that of a consumer who must choose a variant of "reality" from among the
many on offer at a department store.
We have challenged the common conception of "reality" in the previous
chapters when we dealt with Bell's theorem and its experimental
consequences, i.e. we have taken into consideration the possibility of non-
local effects: the instantaneous transfer of information between two places
located at an arbitrary distance. According to the classic way of thinking, the
measurement made in one point "influences" the observations in the other;
but in reality the link between these two places is given by a property of the
two particles (photons, electrons, neutrons or whatever) that were born
together in an entangled state. At their arrival in the points where the two
detectors are located, if the apparatus 1 registers the property A for the
receiving particle, it is necessary that the apparatus 2 registers the property B,
or vice versa. From the point of view of wave functions, the act of measuring
by apparatus 2 makes the quantum state "collapse" simultaneously at each
point of space. Einstein hated this, because he firmly believed in location and
the prohibition of exceeding the speed of light. Thanks to various
experiments we have excluded the possibility that the two detectors exchange
signals; the existence of entanglement is instead a known and widely
confirmed fact, therefore once again quantum physics is correct at a
fundamental level. The problem is all in our reaction to this phenomenon,
apparently paradoxical. A theoretical physicist wrote that we should find a
form of "peaceful coexistence" with quantum mechanics.
The crux of the question is then: is the EPR paradox an illusion, perhaps
conceived in a way that seems deliberately anti-intuitive? Even the great
Feynman felt challenged by Bell's theorem and tried to arrive at a
representation of quantum mechanics that would make it more digestible,
thanks to his idea of the sum on the paths. As we have seen, starting from
certain ideas of Paul Dirac invented a new way of thinking about events. In
his framework, when a radioactive particle decays and gives life to a couple
of other particles, one with spin up and the other with spin down, we must
examine the two "pathways" that are determined. One, which we will call A,
brings the particle with spin up to detector 1 and the one with spin down to
detector 2; the other, path B, does the opposite. A and B have quantistically
two "probability amplitudes", which we can add up. When we make a
measurement, we also find out which of the two paths the system has actually
taken, if A or B; so if for example we find the particle with spin up at point 1,
we know that it has passed through A. In all this, we are only able to
calculate the probability of the various paths.
With this new concept of space-time disappears the possibility that the
information propagates instantly even at great distances. The general picture
is closer to the classic one: you will remember the example in which our
friend sends to us on Earth and to a colleague on Rigel 3 a colored ball,
which can be red or blue; if opening the package we see the blue ball, we
know in that same instant that the other received the red ball. Yet nothing
changes in the universe. Perhaps this model calms our philosophical fears
about the EPR paradox, but it has to be said that even the sum on the paths
has some really disconcerting aspects. The mathematics behind it works so
well that the model excludes the presence of signals that travel faster than
light. This is closely related to facts such as the existence of antimatter and
quantum field theory (as we have seen in chapter 8). We see therefore that the
universe is conceivable as an infinite set of possible paths that govern its
evolution over time. It is as if there was a giant wavefront of probability that
advances. From time to time we make a measurement, we select a path for a
certain event of space-time, but after that the great wave gives a shake and
continues its race towards the future.
Generations of physicists have felt the frustration of not knowing what
quantum theory they were using really was. Even today the conflict between
intuition, experiments and quantum reality can be profound.
Quantum Cryptography
The problem of secure transmission of information is not new. Since ancient
times military espionage has often used secret codes, which counter-
espionage has tried to break. In Elizabethan times, the deciphering of a coded
message was the basis of Mary Stuart's death sentence. According to many
historians, one of the fundamental junctions of the Second World War
occurred when in 1942 the Allies defeated Enigma, the secret code of the
Germans considered "invincible".8 The "big game" of the spies also consists
in understanding if the code was violated and in preparing a countermove by
spreading false information.
Today, as anyone who keeps himself informed knows, cryptography is no
longer a matter for spies and the military. When you enter your credit card
information on eBay or Amazon's website, you assume that the
communication is protected. But the companies of hackers and information
terrorists make us realize that the security of trade, from email to online
banks, is hanging by a fragile thread. The American government takes the
problem seriously, so much so that billions of dollars are spent on it.
The most immediate solution is to introduce a cryptographic "key" that can
be used by both sender and receiver. The standard way to make confidential
information secure is to hide it in a long list of random numbers. But we
know that spies, hackers and strange guys dressed in black with a heart of
stone and a good knowledge of the computer world are able to understand
how to distinguish information from noise.
This is where quantum mechanics comes into play, which can offer
cryptography the services of its special form of randomness, so strange and
wonderful that it constitutes an insurmountable barrier - and as if that were
not enough, it is able to immediately report any attempt to intrude! Since the
history of cryptography is full of "impenetrable" codes that at some point are
penetrated by a superior technology, you are justified if you take this
assertion with the right amount of skepticism (the most famous case is the
one already mentioned of Enigma, the machine that in the Second World War
encrypted Nazi transmissions and was considered unbeatable: the Allies
managed to decrypt it without the enemy noticing).
Let's see a little more in detail how encryption works. The minimum unit of
information that can be transmitted is the bit, an abbreviation of binary digit,
that is "binary number". A bit is simply zero or one. If for example we flip a
coin and decide that 0 represents head and 1 is tail, the result of each flip is a
bit and a series of flips can be written like this:
1011000101110100101010111.
This is as far as classical physics is concerned. In the quantum world there is
an equivalent of the bit that has been baptized qubit (if you think it has
something to do with the "cubit", a traditional unit of measurement that also
appears in the Bible, you are off track). Also it is given by a variable that can
assume two alternative values, in this case the electron spin, equal to up or
down, that take the place of 0 and 1 of the classic bit. So far nothing new.
But a qubit is a quantum state, so it can exist also in "mixed" as well as
"pure" form. A pure state is not influenced by observation. If we measure the
spin of an electron along the z axis, it will necessarily be up or down,
depending on its direction. If the electron is taken at random, each of these
values can occur with a certain probability. If the particle has been emitted in
such a way that it has to assume a certain spin, the measurement will only
record it without changing its state.
In principle we can therefore transmit information in the form of binary code
using a collection of electrons (or photons) with predetermined spin up or
down on the z axis; since they have all been "pure", a detector oriented along
the same axis will read them without disturbing them. But the z-axis must be
defined, it is not an intrinsic feature of space. So here is a secret information
that we can send to the recipient of the message: how the axis along which
the spin is oriented.
If someone tries to intercept the signal with a detector not perfectly parallel to
our z, with its measurement it disrupts the electronic states and thus obtains a
meaningless set of data (without realizing it). Our receivers who read the
message realize instead that something has interfered with the electrons and
therefore that there has been an attempt of intrusion: we know that there is a
spy listening and we can take countermeasures. Vice versa, if the message
arrives without problems we can be sure that the transmission has been done
in a safe way. The key point of the story is that the attempt to intrude causes
changes in the qubit status, of which both the sender and the receiver are
aware.
The transmission of quantum states can also be used to securely transmit a
"key", i.e. a very large causally generated number, which is used to decode
the information in certain encrypted communication systems. Thanks to
qubits, we know if the key is secure or compromised and can therefore take
countermeasures. Quantum cryptography has been tested so far on messages
transmitted a few kilometers away. It will take some time before it can be
used in practice, because this requires large investments in the field of lasers
of the latest generation. But one day we will be able to make the hassle of
having to contest a purchase charged on our credit card in some distant
country where we have never been.
Quantum Computers
However, there is a threat to the security of quantum cryptography, and it is
the quantum computer, the number one candidate to become the
supercomputer of the 21st century. According to the empirical law enunciated
by Gordon Moore, "the number of transistors on a chip doubles every twenty-
four months".10 As some joker has calculated, if automobile technology had
progressed at the same pace as computer technology over the last thirty years,
we would now have sixty gram-heavy cars that cost forty dollars, with a
trunk of one and a half cubic kilometers, consuming almost nothing and
reaching speeds of up to one and a half million kilometers per hour.
In the computer field, we have gone from vacuum tubes to transistors and
integrated circuits in less time than a human life span. Yet the physics on
which these tools are based, including the best available today, is classical.
Using quantum mechanics, in theory, we should build new and even more
powerful machines. They have not yet appeared in IBM's design office or in
the business plans of Silicon Valley's boldest startups (at least as far as we
know), but quantum computers would make the fastest of the classical ones
look like little more than an abacus in the hands of a mutilated person.
Quantum computation theory makes use of the already mentioned qubits and
adapts to non classical physics the classical theory of information. The
fundamental concepts of this new science were established by Richard
Feynman and others in the early eighties and had a decisive boost thanks to
the work of David Deutsch in 1985. Today it is an expanding discipline. The
keystone has been the design of "logic gates" (computer equivalents of
switches) that take advantage of quantum interference and entanglement to
create a potentially much faster way of making certain calculations.
Interference, made explicit by double slit experiments, is one of the strangest
phenomena in the quantum world. We know that just two slits made in a
screen change the behavior of a photon passing through it in a bizarre way.
The explanation given by the new physics brings into question the probability
amplitudes of the various paths that the particle can follow, which if summed
up properly provide the probability that it will end up on a certain region of
the detector. If instead of two slits there were a thousand, the basic principle
would not change and to calculate the probability that the light arrives at this
or that point we should take into account all the possible paths. The
complexity of the situation increases further if we take two photons and not
just one, each of which has thousands of choices, which brings the number of
total states to the order of millions. With three photons the states become of
the order of billions, and so on. The complexity grows exponentially to the
increase of the inputs.
The final result is perhaps very simple and predictable, but to make all these
accounts is very little practical, with a classic calculator. The great idea of
Feynman was to propose an analogic calculator that exploits quantum
physics: we use real photons and we really perform the experiment, leaving
in this way that nature to complete in a fast and efficient way that monstrous
calculation. The ideal quantum computer should be able to choose by itself
the type of measurements and experiments that correspond to the required
calculation, and at the end of the operations translate the physical result into
the numerical result. All this implies the use of a slightly more complicated
version of the double slit system.
The incredible computers of the future
To give you an idea of how powerful these calculation techniques are, let's
take a simple example and compare a classical situation with the
corresponding quantum one. Let's start from a "3-bit register", i.e. a device
that at each instant is able to assume one of these eight possible
configurations: 000, 001, 010, 011, 100, 101, 110, 111, corresponding to the
numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. A classical computer records this information
with three switches that can be open (value 0) or closed (value 1). It is easy to
see by analogy that a 4-bit register can encode sixteen numbers, and so on.
However, if the register is not a mechanical or electronic system but an atom,
it is able to exist in a mixed state, superimposing the fundamental one (which
we make correspond to 0) and the excited one (equal to 1). In other words, it
is a qubit. A 3 qubit register therefore expresses eight numbers at the same
time, a 4 qubit register expresses sixteen and in general a N qubit register
contains 2N.
In classical computers the bit is generally given by the electric charge of a
small capacitor, which can be charged (1) or not charged (0). By adjusting the
current flow we can change the bit value. In quantum computers, instead, to
change a qubit we use a light beam to put the atom in excited or fundamental
state. This implies that at each instant, at each step of the calculation, the
qubit can assume the values 0 and 1 at the same time. We begin to realize
great potential.
With a 10 registers qubit we are able to represent at each instant all the first
1024 numbers. With two of them, coupled in a matching way, we can make
sure that we have a table of 1024 × 1024 multiplications. A traditional
calculator, although very fast, should perform in sequence more than a
million calculations to get all those data, while a quantum computer is able to
explore all the possibilities simultaneously and get the right result in a single
step, without effort.
This and other theoretical considerations have led to believe that, in some
cases, a quantum computer would solve in a year a problem that the fastest of
classic machines would not finish before a few billion years. Its power comes
from the ability to operate simultaneously on all states and to perform many
calculations in parallel on a single operating unit. But there is a but
(suspense: here would fit Also Sprach Zarathustra by Richard Strauss).
Before investing all your savings on a Cupertino startup, you should know
that a number of experts are sceptical about quantum computer applications
(although they all agree that theoretical discussions on the subject are
valuable for understanding certain fundamental quantum phenomena).
It is true that some important problems can be solved very well, but we are
still talking about very different machines, designed for very specific
situations, which will hardly replace the current ones. The classical world is
another kind of world, and that is why we do not bring the broken machine to
the quantum mechanic. One of the major difficulties is that these devices are
very sensitive to interference with the outside world: if a single cosmic ray
makes a qubit change state, all the calculation is blessed. They are also
analog machines, designed to simulate a particular calculation with a
particular process, and therefore lack the universality typical of our
computers, in which run programs of various nature that make us calculate
everything we want. It is also very difficult to build them in practice. In order
for quantum computers to become reality and it is worth investing time and
money in them, we will have to solve complex reliability problems and find
usable algorithms.
One of these potentially effective algorithms is the factoring of large numbers
(in the sense of their breakdown into prime factors, such as 21=3×7). From
the classical point of view, it is relatively easy to multiply the numbers
among them but it is generally very difficult to do the reverse operation, i.e.
to find the factors of a colossus like:
3 204 637 196 245 567 128 917 346 493 902 297 904 681 379
This problem has important applications in the field of cryptography and is a
candidate to be the spearhead of quantum computing, because it is not
solvable with classical calculators.
We also mention the bizarre theory of the English mathematician Roger
Penrose that concerns our consciousness. A human being is able to perform
certain types of calculations at lightning speed, like a calculator, but he does
it with very different methods. When we play chess against a computer, for
example, we assimilate a large amount of sensory data and quickly integrate
it with experience, to counteract a machine that works in an algorithmic and
systematic way. The computer always provides correct results, the human
brain sometimes does not: we are efficient but inaccurate. We have sacrificed
precision to increase speed.
According to Penrose the feeling of being conscious is the coherent sum of
many possibilities, i.e. it is a quantum phenomenon. So according to him we
are for all intents and purposes quantum computers. The wave functions that
we use to produce computational results are perhaps distributed not only in
the brain but throughout the body. In his essay Shadows of the Mind, Penrose
hypothesizes that the wave functions of consciousness reside in the
mysterious microtubules of neurons. Interesting, to say the least, but a true
theory of consciousness is still missing.
Be that as it may, quantum computation could find its raison d'être by
shedding light on the role of information in basic physics. Maybe we will be
able both to build new and powerful machines, and to reach a new way of
understanding the quantum world, maybe more in tune with our changing
perceptions, less strange, ghostly, disturbing. If this will really happen, it will
be one of the rare moments in the history of science when another discipline
(in this case the theory of information, or perhaps consciousness) merges
with physics to shed light on its basic structure.
Grand finale
Let us conclude our story by summarizing the many philosophical questions
waiting to be answered: how can light be both a particle and a wave? are
there many worlds or is there only one? is there a truly impenetrable secret
code? what is reality at the fundamental level? are the laws of physics
regulated by many dice throws? do these questions make sense? the answer is
maybe "we have to get used to these oddities"? where and when will the next
great scientific leap forward take place?
We started from the mortal blow inflicted by Galileo to Aristotelian physics.
We have moved into the clockwork harmony of Newton's classical universe,
with its deterministic laws. We could have stopped there, in a real and
metaphorical sense, in that comforting reality (even if without cell phones).
But we did not. We have penetrated into the mysteries of electricity and
magnetism, forces that only in the nineteenth century were united and woven
into the fabric of classical physics, thanks to Faraday and Maxwell. Our
knowledge seemed then complete, so much so that at the end of the century
there were those who predicted the end of physics. All the problems worth
solving seemed to be solved: it was enough to add a few details, which would
certainly come within the classical theories. End of the line, we go down;
physicists can bundle up and go home.
But there was still some incomprehensible phenomenon here and there. The
burning embers are red, while according to calculations they should be blue.
And why is there no trace of ether? Why can't we go faster than a ray of
light? Perhaps the last word was not yet said. Soon, the universe would be
revolutionized by a new and extraordinary generation of scientists: Einstein,
Bohr, Schrödinger, Heisenberg, Pauli, Dirac and others, all enthusiastic about
the idea.
Of course, the old and dear Newtonian mechanics continue to work well in
many cases, such as the motion of planets, rockets, balls and steam engines.
Even in the XXVII century a ball thrown in the air will follow the elegant
classical parable. But after 1900, or rather 1920, or better still 1930, who
wants to know how the atomic and subatomic world really works is forced to
change head and enter the realm of quantum physics and its intrinsic
probabilistic nature. A realm that Einstein never wanted to accept completely.
We know that the journey has not been easy. The omnipresent double slit
experiment alone can cause migraines. But it was only the beginning, because
afterwards came the dizzying plateaus of Schrödinger's wave function,
Heisenberg's uncertainty and Copenhagen's interpretation, as well as various
disturbing theories. We met cats alive and dead at the same time, beams of
light behaving like waves and particles, physical systems linked to the
observer, debates on the role of God as the supreme dice player... And when
everything seemed to make some sense, here come other puzzles: Pauli's
exclusion principle, the EPR paradox, Bell's theorem. It is not material for
pleasant conversations at parties, even for New Age adepts who often
formulate a wrong version of it. But we have made strength and we have not
given up, even in front of some inevitable equation.
We have been adventurous and we have granted audience to ideas so bizarre
that they could be Star Trek episode titles: "Many Worlds", "Copenhagen"
(which is actually also a play), "The Strings and M-theory", "The Cosmic
Landscape" and so on. We hope that you enjoyed the trip and that now, like
us, you have an idea of how wonderful and deeply mysterious our world is.
In the new century looms the problem of human consciousness. Perhaps it
can be explained thanks to quantum states. Although not a few people think
so, it is not necessarily so - if two phenomena are unknown to us, they are not
necessarily connected.
The human mind has a role in quantum mechanics, as you will remember,
and that is when measurement comes into play. The observer (his mind)
interferes with the system, which could imply a role of consciousness in the
physical world. Does the mind-body duality have anything to do with
quantum mechanics? Despite all that we have recently discovered about how
the brain encodes and manipulates information to control our behavior, it
remains a great mystery: how is it possible that these neurochemical actions
lead to the "self", to the "inner life"? How is it possible to generate the feeling
of being who we are?
There is no lack of critics of this correlation between quantum and mind,
including the discoverer of DNA Francis Crick, who in his essay Science and
the Soul writes: "The self, my joys and sorrows, my memories and ambitions,
my sense of personal identity and free will, are nothing more than the result
of the activity of a colossal number of neurons and neurotransmitters.
We hope that this is only the beginning of your journey and that you will
continue to explore the wonders and apparent paradoxes of our quantum
universe.
