
                                    –Brian Greene, The Elegant Universe
                  TABLE OF CONTENTS
         FOREWORD: THE QUANTUM FICTION
         PROLOGUE
1.       TOWARDS QUANTUM PHYSICS
1.1.     From Newtonian Mechanics to Quantum Physics
1.1.1.   Newtonian Mechanics
1.1.2.   Quantum Physics
1.2.     A Historical Overview of Quantum Physics
1.2.1.   The Age of Discoveries in Quantum Physics
1.2.2.   The Period of Mathematical Formulation
1.2.3.   Later Developments in Quantum Physics
2.       A N OVERVIEW OF QUANTUM PHYSICS
2.1.     The Quantum World
2.1.1.   The Continuum and the Quantum
2.1.2.   The Quantum Itself
2.2.     The Quantum ‘Wavicles'
2.2.1.   The Quantum Wave
2.2.2.   The Quantum Particle
2.2.3.   The Wave-Particle Complementarity
2.3.     The Quantum Uncertainty
2.3.1.   The Uncertainty Principle
2.3.2.   The Quantum Indeterminism
2.4.     The Quantum Wave Function and Its Collapse
2.4.1.   The Quantum Wave Function
2.4.2.   The Collapse of the Wave Function
2.5.     The Quantum Reality Itself
2.5.1. The Strange Quantum World
2.5.2. The Copenhagen Interpretation and the EPR Paradox
2.5.2.1. The Copenhagen Interpretation
2.5.2.2. The EPR Paradox
2.5.3. The Quantum Wholeness
2.5.3.1. The Quantum Non-locality
2.5.3.2. The Quantum Entanglement
2.5.4. Quantum Reality as Potentiality
3.       THE QUANTUM FIELD THEORIES
3.1.     Towards Quantum Field Theories
3.1.1. The Unification of Relativity and Quantum Theory
3.1.2. The Quantum Field
3.1.3. Quantum Fields and Particles
3.2.     Quantum Fields and Particle Interactions
3.2.1. The Fundamental Forces as Particle Interactions 132
3.2.2. The Four Basic Particle Interactions
3.3.     Quantum Gravity and Quantum Vacuum
3.3.1. Towards Quantum Theories of Gravity 145
3.3.1.1. Infinities Galore
3.3.1.2. Quantum Theories of Gravity
3.3.2. The Quantum Vacuum
3.3.2.1. Empty Space as Quantum Vacuum
3.3.2.2. Quantum Vacuum Fluctuation
4.       THE STANDARD M ODEL OF PARTICLE PHYSICS
4.1.     Towards the Standard Model
4.2.     The Ingredients of the Standard Model
4.2.1. Through Particle Spin to Particle Classification
4.2.2. The Particle Zoo
4.2.2.1. Fermions
4.2.2.2. Gauge Bosons
4.2.2.3. The Higgs Boson
4.3.     The Mechanisms of the Standard Model
4.3.1. Gauge Symmetry and Symmetry Breaking
4.3.2. The Gauge Symmetry in Particle Interactions
4.3.3. Symmetry Breaking in the Early Universe
4.4.     Beyond the Standard Model
4.4.1. The Challenges to the Standard Model
4.4.2. The Grand Unified Theory (GUT)
4.4.3. The Theory of Everything (TOE)
5.       THE QUANTUM WORLD AND THE OBSERVER
5.1.     The Observer in the Classical World
5.2.     The Observer in the Quantum World
5.2.1.   The Observer and Measurement of Quantum Objects
5.2.2.   The Observer and the Properties of Quantum Objects
6.       THE QUANTUM C OSMOLOGY
6.1.     The Quantum Origins of the Universe
6.1.1.   ‘Taming' Big Bang Singularity
6.1.2.   The Vacuum Creation of the Universe
6.1.3.   The Inflationary Universe
6.2.     The Quantum Destruction of the Universe
6.2.1.   Energy Levels and Quantum Tunnelling
6.2.2.   The Vacuum Decay
         EPILOGUE
         N OTES
         BIBILOGRAPHY
         INDEX
              LIST OF FIGURES AND TABLES

                                      FIGURES
Figure 1. The classical trajectory of a particle from A to B

Figure 2. Six possible paths of a particle from A to B

Figure 3. The electromagnetic spectrum

Figure 4. Low frequency light with long wavelength

Figure 5. High frequency light with short wavelength

Figure 6. Single-slit experiment with right slit open

Figure 7. Single-slit experiment with left slit open

Figure 8. The double-slit experiment (classical view)

Figure 9. The double-slit experiment (quantum view)

Figure 10. A Feynman diagram of an electron's paths

Figure 11. Probabilities of finding an electron

Figure 12. The Photoelectric effect

Figure 13. Schrödinger's cat

Figure 14. ‘Scattering' process in particle interaction

Figure 15. Quantum space-time ‘foam'

Figure 16. Sequential magnification of a region of space
Figure 17. Annihilation of electron-positron pair

Figure 18. Rotating pencil

Figure 19. Fallen pencil

Figure 20. Ordinary magnet

Figure 21. Heated magnet

Figure 22. The progressive unification of forces

Figure 23. Space-time singularity

Figure 24. The Quantum origin of the universe

Figure 25. ‘Mother' universe and ‘child' universes

Figure 26. False vacuum and true vacuum

Figure 27. Inflation of the universe

Figure 28. Electron absorbing and emitting photon

Figure 29. The Quantum tunnelling

Figure 30. Quantum tunnelling from false to true vacuum


                                       TABLES
Table 1. Fermions and bosons

Table 2. Quarks

Table 3. Leptons

Table 4. Gauge bosons
        FOREWORD: THE QUANTUM FICTION
      The story of the development of physics in the 20th century has been
told by several authors from different points of view, addressing different
audiences. Although the treatments differ in detail, they converge in
according to quantum mechanics the pride of place in the hierarchy of
conceptual revolutions. Ushering in a paradigm shift in the Kuhnian sense,
in the early decades of the past century, quantum mechanics has been
reaping one success after another in explaining known phenomena and
predicting new ones. Till then, physics had been revolving around themes
like causality, certainty and continuity (the three Cs.). Towards the end of
the 19th century, a host of puzzling problems had cropped up in the area of
experimental physics, which resisted solutions employing the classical
physics of Newton, Maxwell and others. Phenomena, such as black body
radiation, atomic spectra, photoelectric effect and specific heats of solids,
among others, required the introduction of the concept of quantization, a
totally strange and ad hoc technique into physics. Einstein's theory of
relativity also appeared on the scene, but it didn't solve many problems
raging at that time. The word ‘quantum' means a ‘unit or definite portion;'
it was applied for the first time by Max Planck (1900) in his quantum
theory of black body radiation. The key assumption he employed was the
discrete nature of radiation energy. It was revolutionary in the sense of
violating for the first time the sacred myth of continuous variations of
energy. Later on, the discreteness hypothesis was extended to angular
momentum by Sommerfeld. As a result of the application of the
quantization hypothesis, a set of ad hoc rules emerged which came to be
called ‘the old quantum theory.'

     In the 1920s, there arose two fundamental theories that justified the
results of the old-fashioned quantum theory, but went beyond it, not only
in respect of the application strategy but also in predicting new properties
and phenomena. These were known as matrix mechanics and wave
mechanics which produced identical results in spite of their different
mathematical and physical foundations. That they are examples of
different mathematical foundations was soon established, and there began
an era of hectic applications of the unified approach which was named
‘quantum mechanics.' The mathematical apparatus of quantum mechanics
made ample use of the theory of linear operators in Hilbert space. Physical
or measurable quantities are represented by the so-called hermitian
operators that possess real eigen values corresponding to experimentally
measurable values. The set of eigen values of an operator is called its
‘spectrum.' In atomic physics, for example, it turns out that the spectrum
of energy eigen values of an atom is discrete, giving rise to the observed
frequencies of spectral lines. A spectral line corresponds to a transition
between two energy states. The discovery of spin preceded the formulation
of a quantum mechanical theory of the electron in relativistic terms by
Paul Dirac. He subsequently developed an abstract method of quantization
of discrete as well as continuous systems. The electromagnetic field, a
continuous system, was quantized by Dirac following his general method.
The difference between quantum mechanics and quantum field theory is
that the former describes as single (discrete) particle while the latter
describes a many particle system. Thus in the quantum field theory of
electromagnetic field, there are particles of light called photons in the
(quantized) field carrying it.

     The most outstanding, fundamental development in quantum
mechanics was the discovery of the uncertainty principle by Heisenberg in
1927. In fact, this is the key principle that distinguishes the strange world
of quantum physics from the familiar one of classical physics. It states
that it is impossible to determine precisely and simultaneously the values
of certain pairs of physical quantities like position and momentum. Both
these quantities are simultaneously required to define a path for a particle,
and therefore, it is impossible to predict the future behaviour of an atom or
electron. The uncertainty principle explains why probability enters
quantum physics in a fundamental way. Since determinism is lost, the
classical role of causality is also suspect, as far as quantum mechanism is
concerned. It also implies the breakdown of the notion of a continuous
path for quantum systems. The energy of a bound system like an atom is
discrete for small values of what are called quantum numbers, but
continuous for very large values of the numbers. It may be noted that if a
system is in a bound state, its total energy will be negative (e.g. hydrogen
atom with an electron bound to it), but in an unbound state (e.g. the
electron released from the hydrogen atom) the total energy will be positive
and continuous, giving rise to the continuous part of its spectrum.

     Among the innumerable applications of quantum mechanics, the most
spectacular and brilliant ones are in particle physics, resulting in the
development of the standard model of elementary particles. Quantum field
theory is the platform on which it has been launched. The basic premises
of quantum field theory are simple. A quantum or quantized field is a
continuous system obeying quantization rules which imply the existence
of particles of definite physical properties such as mass, spin, charge,
helicity and so on. In nature four fundamental forces are believed to exist,
and these are described by quantum fields. All except the gravitational
field have been successfully quantized. These are the fields carrying the
forces like weak, electromagnetic and strong forces. Relativity permits the
creation and destruction of particles. A significant break through in the
understanding of the fundamental forces is the development of the unified
theory of weak and electromagnetic interactions, later supplemented by
the emergence of quantum theory of strong interaction. The resulting
theory is called SU(2) x U(1) x SU(3) colour gauge theory of quarks,
leptons and gauge fields. These are the force fields carrying massless
photons, massive bosons and fermions.

     Quantum field theory is eminently successful in accounting for
transitions involving any of those interactions just mentioned. So far no
one has formulated a quantum field theory of gravitation. A currently
emerging view is that gravity is not a fundamental force, but an ‘emergent
force,' derived from the three other forces. The model of particles and
their interactions built on the basis of the concept of quantum gauge fields
interacting with particles is the so-called Standard Model. However, very
recently, some experimental results seem to point towards the possible
existence of a fifth force. This is very much at a speculative stage.
      Joseph Mathew has done a brilliant job in producing a popular
synthesis of different strands of quantum physics. This includes not only a
survey of historical developments of its framework, but also controversial
aspects, such as quantum cosmology, measurement theory and role of the
observer. Some aspects of this grand theory may sound just like surreal
fiction. I have immense pleasure in introducing before intelligent and
curious people this beautiful work. The author is already well known for
his contributions to philosophical theology and particularly for his book
on cosmology. I wish him the very best.


                                      Prof. Dr. K. Babu Joseph
                              PROLOGUE
       It is a measure of the revolution brought about by the advent
       of the quantum theory that every one of these claims [of
       Newtonian mechanics] has been challenged. What is in volved
       here is no small alteration of the details of our general con
       ception of reality but a revolution in the very foundations of
       that conception, touching every aspect of our understanding of
       the world, ourselves, and the relations between the two.

               -Clifford A. Hooker, “The Nature of Quantum
                            Mechanical Reality”

     The author's book In Search of Cosmic Origins: The Great Saga of
the Universe narrates the fascinating wonders of the megacosm, of the
origin and evolution of the universe, of galaxies, stars and solar system.
The present work The Strange World of Quantum Physics contemplates the
breathtaking world of the microcosm, of subatomic particles, such as
photons, electrons, protons, neutrons and quarks, and of different fields
like, electromagnetic field. This quantum world is poles apart from the
Newtonian world of our common sense experience. Certainly, Einstein's
theory of relativity also is different from Newton's physics. However, the
theory of relativity retains some of the fundamental concepts of Newton's
theory, such as continuum, causality and determinism. But quantum
physics overturns all the basic concepts of Newtonian mechanics. It is the
science of the ‘discrete' world - of the ‘quantum,' of waveparticle duality,
uncertainty principle, wave function, non-locality, quantum vacuum and
the like. Moreover, unlike the other two theories, quantum physics is a
foundational theory in so far as it takes us to the ultimate depths of
physical reality. Truly, it is ‘meta-physics' in the literal sense of the word.1
“Once you get down to the quantum randomness level, no further
explanation is possible. You can't go deeper because physics stops here.”2
Indeed, as our voyage into microcosm progresses from quantum physics
proper to quantum field theories, thence to the quantum creation and
destruction of the universe, one gets the uncanny feeling that one is diving
deeper and deeper to reach the rock bottom of reality.

      Such eerie reactions are compounded by the fact that the quantum
world cannot be pictured or visualized in its weirdness and strangeness,
though it is not unintelligible; but its understanding demands the use of
very abstract and complex mathematics. In formulating their theories,
quantum physicists have invented mathematical systems very remote from
our ordinary modes of thinking. The strange quantum world is made
intelligible employing highly abstract mathematical concepts. Werner
Heisenberg's matrix mechanics and Ervin Schrödinger's wave mechanics
are such imposing mathematical frameworks. Although quantum physics
is couched in highly symbolic language of abstract mathematics, its
mathematical objects do refer to some physical entities. “Physics should
be more than a set of formulas that predict what we will observe in an
experiment; it should give a picture of what reality is.”3 Hence, in the last
analysis, quantum physicists have to provide conceptual clarifications of
the mathematical formalisms they employ in their theories. They have to
tell us and themselves what the mathematical concepts mean or refer to.
Quantum physicist Heinz Pagels speaks about physicists pondering over
“the equations and their meaning for the real world, developing an
interpretation which departed radically from naïve realism.”4 In fact, apart
from inventing their theories, great physicists have engaged themselves in
such conceptual elucidations. The debates, often bitter and harsh, between
Niels Bohr and Albert Einstein make up famous chapters in the history of
quantum theory. As we shall see in the second chapter, these disputes
concern the basic conceptual problems of quantum physics, such as its
in/completeness, in/determinism and non/locality. Although these
discussions often employ mathematical formalisms, in the final analysis
they have to do with the conceptual frameworks of the theories in
question.

     In fact, philosophical description and synthesis are excellent tools for
the exposition of the conceptual structures of scientific theories - in the
present context, of quantum physics. Many scientists themselves have
undertaken such projects, and even in the title of their works, they use
words, like ‘philosophy,'       ‘philosophical,'    ‘metaphysics,'   and
‘metaphysical.' We mention a few works of the authors who have
employed philosophical methods in their presentations of scientific
theories. Edwin Burtt (The Metaphysical Foundations of Modern Physical
Science), David Bohm (Causality and Chance in Modern Physics;
Wholeness and Implicate Order), Milic Capek, (Bergson and Modern
Physics; The Concepts of Space and Time; The New Aspects of Time; The
Philosophical Impact of Contemporary Physics), Paul Davies (The
Accidental Universe; The Forces of Nature; Other Worlds; Quantum
Mechanics; Space and Time in the Modern Universe), John C.
Polkinghorne (One World; The Particle Play; The Quantum World; Reason
and Reality).

     Conceptual clarifications are all the more important in the case of
quantum physics because the microworld it deals with is so bizarre and
remote from our ordinary experience. Hence, we have to clarify what it is
all about. The present work The Strange World of Quantum Physics is such
a text on the conceptual framework of quantum physics - its important
concepts and their interrelations. In this project, we have employed a
philosophical method and a literary style which we call ‘narrative
synthesis.' This is a method we have developed over the years in writing
our books and articles. Our long years of experience in teaching
philosophy also have contributed to a great extent in employing the
method of narrative synthesis. This method is essentially a narrative; it is
a narration, a presentation, or a discourse about a particular subject. But it
is more than that; it is a narrative which aims at a synthesis. The method is
in fact a narrative which is a synthesis, and a synthesis which is a
narrative. In a word, it is the method of story telling, not about some
imaginary world, but in the present case, about the quantum world.5 The
reviewers of the author's previous books have in fact acknowledged this
style of narrative synthesis. In the review of In Search of Cosmic Origins:
The Great Saga of the Universe, Poulose Mangai writes:

       The billions of years old history of the universe and its future
       possibilities are presented to us in the form of a most
       interesting and exciting saga. It is a saga of creation and
       evolution with plots and subplots, with numerous events in a
       logical and intelligible sequence without leaps or gaps, and
       with many and varied characters. All this is unified and it is
       one single saga. And it is for the real, not imagined.6

Similarly, in the review of author ' s From Cosmos to Theos: Towards a
New Philosophical Theology, Augustine Pamplany refers to the method of
narrative synthesis employed in the book: “It requires an extra ingenuity
to carry a profound scientific field like cosmology to such a narrative
style. Certainly, the long decades of teaching experience of the author have
significantly contributed to the literary style of the book.”7

     The reader will witness the method of narrative synthesis unfolding,
not only in the present book as a whole, but in each chapter, section and
subsection. From prologue to epilogue, The Strange World of Quantum
Physics develops a narrative with many plots and numerous subplots, all
connected in logical sequences without leaps or gaps. Since we are telling
a story, we have left out some sub-plots, like critiques of different
theories, so as not to interrupt the development of the main plot except in
some cases where it is needed for the progress of the story itself. The
logical flow of ideas is ensured from the beginning of the work to its end.
Readers will find the book profusely dotted with citations and references -
- many of them from great physicists, like Albert Einstein, Max Planck,
Niels Bohr, Werner Heisenberg, Louis de Broglie, Nobel Laureates like
Eugene Wigner, Steven Weinberg and Ilya Prigogine, eminent physicists
like John von Neumann, David Bohm, John Wheeler, Stephen Hawking
and John Polkinghorne, and reputed mathematicians, like Hermann Weyl
and Roger Penrose. This is done intentionally in order to substantiate the
statements in the text by the authority of these great men of science. We
have also inserted a number of figures and tables in order to illustrate the
concepts being discussed. Unavoidably, some theories had to be repeated
in different contexts. However, we have taken care that the repeated
passages are adapted to the different themes explored. The present volume
can be best used as introductory and complementary reading for quantum
physics, and as reference book, especially by college and university
students. Hopefully they will find the abstract mathematical formalisms
and constructs they learn in their courses on quantum physics taking on
flesh as concepts.

      The book is divided into six chapters. The first chapter, “Towards
Quantum Physics,” is introductory. It starts with a comparison between the
major themes of Newtonian mechanics and quantum theory. This is
followed by a historical outline of quantum physics. The second chapter,
“An Overview of Quantum Physics,” is an exposition of the important
concepts of quantum theory, such as wave-particle duality, Heisenberg's
uncertainty principle, wave function and non-locality. The third chapter
entitled, “The Quantum Field Theories,” is an exploration of the
unification of quantum theory and the theory of relativity. Quantum field
theories, such as quantum electrodynamics, electroweak theory and
quantum chromodynamics are introduced. The proposals for quantum
theories of gravity and quantum vacuum are also discussed. The fourth
chapter, “The Standard Model of Particle Physics,” presents the current
picture of quantum physics. The fifth chapter, “The Quantum World and
the Observer,” deals with what is known as the ‘measurement problem.'
The Copenhagen interpretation of quantum physics affirms the role of
observer in the process of measurement/observation. The last chapter,
“The Quantum Cosmology,” has as its theme the quantum creation and
destruction of the universe. The “Epilogue” concludes The Strange World
of Quantum Physics highlighting the weird, bizarre and exotic dimensions
of quantum mechanics.

     A word is in place about the author's credentials to write the present
book which demands a good grasp of the theories of physics, especially
Newtonian mechanics, theory of relativity and quantum theory itself.
Although I have had almost no formal training in theoretical physics, I
have at my disposal a very valuable tool to probe the conceptual depths of
quantum physics - that is, philosophical analysis and synthesis. I had my
formal training in philosophy at the Institute of Philosophy, University of
Louvain, Belgium. During my studies at the Institute, an American
professor Kenneth Gallagher introduced one of the best books written on
the philosophical dimensions of modern physics, The Philosophical
Impact of Contemporary Physics by Milic Capek.8 It is an excellent
comparative study of Newtonian physics and Einstein's theory of
relativity. It is this book that introduced me to the world of physics,
especially Newtonian mechanics and the theory of relativity. Then my
readings and researches took me to quantum physics. Besides, I spent a
year as post-doctoral student at the University of Louvain. I had also
opportunities to do research at the University of Oxford and also at the
Catholic University of America, Washington, D. C. During my sojourn at
these Universities, I have read hundreds of books and articles on physics.
My previous books In Search of Cosmic Origins (2014) and From Cosmos
to Theos (2017), both based on physics, have inspired me to write the
present book. I have published also a number of articles on scientific
subjects in different journals. The experience of teaching philosophy of
science for decades hopefully has contributed in great measure to express
the concepts of quantum mechanics with clarity. The synthesis in the
present volume is the outcome of all my reading and writing on Newtonian
mechanics, theory of relativity and quantum physics.

      In writing and producing the present work, many persons and
institutions have supported me. My Provincial Superiors have provided
conducive atmosphere to make this work possible. I am deeply indebted to
Fr. George Antony Assaricheril, the present Provincial Superior of St.
Joseph Province of the Capuchins, Kerala, for his fraternal support. I am
very grateful also to Fr. Joseph Puthenpurackal, the former Provincial
Superior of the same province for his constant encouragement. I express
my sincere gratitude to Fr. Thomas Jacob Thekkumkattil. As my former
Provincial Superior, he has given me ample opportunities to do research at
different universities abroad. My special thanks are due to late Fr. Felix M.
Podimattam, eminent moral theologian who had been constantly
encouraging me in my academic pursuits. I am ever grateful to Dr. Jan Van
der Veken, Professor emeritus, Institute of Philosophy, University of
Louvain, Belgium. He has been a constant source of inspiration to me
throughout my studies in Louvain. I am very much indebted to the
renowned quantum physicist Prof. Dr. K. Babu Joseph, former Vice-
Chancellor of Cochin University of Science and Technology, for
painstakingly correcting the final draft of the book. He has suggested
valuable corrections and improvements of the text, and has obliged to
write a foreword entitled, “The Quantum Fiction” to the present volume.

     I gratefully acknowledge the fraternal support of all the members of
Loreto Capuchin fraternity at Muvattupuzha, Kerala. Special thanks are
due to the former superiors of the Loreto community, Frs. Michael
Paroosseril, Dominic Cheradil, Joseph Simon Kochuparambil, and the
present superior, Anish Pulickal for their support and encouragement. I am
very grateful to my brother Wg Cdr (Retd) Basil Mathew who has twice
gone through the draft of the book, and suggested necessary corrections. I
thank sincerely Br. Rio Capuchin for the computer work - for helping to
prepare the cover page and drawing all the figures and tables attractively. I
thank Mr. Nigel Fernandes, the CEO of Asian Trading Corporation,
Bangalore, for taking up the responsibility of publishing the present
volume. Thanks are due also to Mr. Babu Elias, Manager of the publishing
department of ATC, for preparing the script for publication. I express my
gratitude to Mr. Ajikumar for DTP lay out. I am grateful to Fr. Martin
Mannath, the Manager of Seraphic Press, Bharananganam, for printing the
book in an elegant format.

     Last, but not least, as we pass from theory to theory, deeper into the
mysteries of the quantum world, we are overwhelmed by the grandeur of
the great gift granted to great scientists - the capacity to comprehend the
ultimate depths of physical reality. Paul Davies' observation is pertinent.
He says: “Yet I feel compelled to believe that, through science [here,
quantum mechanics], we really are being allowed to glimpse the rational
foundations of physical existence.”9 Eminent quantum physicist Eugene
Wigner acknowledges: “The miracle of the appropriateness of the
language of mathematics for the formulation of the laws of [quantum]
physics is a wonderful gift which we neither understand nor deserve.”10
Spontaneously, our thought rises to the ‘Wonderful Giver' who graciously
grants gifts to us humans who do not deserve them. Sentiments of
gratitude well up in our mind to this Wonderful Giver of gifts for granting
us a ‘glimpse of the rational foundations of physical existence.' A hymn of
thanksgiving springs forth from the depth of our being. “I thank you for
the wonder of my being, for the wonders of all your creation.” (Psalm:
139,14).

                                                Joseph Mathew
                                    1
              TOWARDS QUANTUM PHYSICS
       On that day, [when the quantum was introduced into science]
       the vast and grandiose edifice of classical physics found itself
       shaken to its very foundations, without anyone very clearly
       realizing it at first. In the history of the intellectual world
       there have been few upheavals comparable to this.

               -Louis De Broglie, The Revolution in Physics

     The present chapter is obviously introductory. It presents the thematic
and historical settings of quantum physics. This great theory did not
appear all on a sudden on the contemporary scientific horizon. In a real
sense, it has its antecedents in Newtonian mechanics. To be sure, no
adequate comprehension of quantum theory is possible without at least
some understanding of Newton's physics. Hence, in the present chapter we
introduce the major themes of both theories in comparison. Hopefully, this
would impart to the reader an overall ‘feel' of quantum physics in contrast
to Newtonian theory. Here we follow the method of the eminent quantum
physicist Louis de Broglie. He compares and contrasts the concepts of
quantum physics with those of Newton's mechanics throughout his great
work The Revolution in Physics. As we deal with the important notions of
quantum mechanics in the following chapters, we invariably refer also to
the corresponding concepts in Newton's physics. In most cases, we can
comprehend the ideas of quantum theory adequately only by comparing
them with related conceptions in Newtonian mechanics. The present
chapter traces also the historical development of quantum physics.

1.1. From Newtonian Mechanics to Quantum Physics

     Newtonian mechanics and quantum physics present a very interesting
study in comparison and contrast just because the scientific revolution
brought about by quantum theory is very spectacular, and it affects the
very foundations of Newton's physics. Clifford Hooker says:

       It is a measure of the revolution brought about by the advent
       of the quantum theory that every one of these claims [of
       Newtonian mechanics] has been challenged. What is involved
       here is no small alteration of the details of our general
       conception of reality but a revolution in the very foundations
       of that conception, touching every aspect of our understanding
       of the world, ourselves, and the relations between the two.1

     Renowned quantum physicist David Bohm suggests that the way
quantum revolution challenged Newton's mechanics goes much deeper
than the manner in which Einstein's theory of relativity confronted
Newton's theory: “The quantum theory, however, actually overturned
[Newtonian] mechanism in a much more thoroughgoing way than did the
theory of relativity.”2 Peter Coveney and Roger Highfield likewise
comment: “In attempting to describe the world at this microscopic level,
we find that Newton's mechanics breaks down. Newton's failure here is
even more spectacular than his failure to cope with the fast and highly
massive objects dealt with by relativity.”3 In order to comprehend the great
scientific paradigm shift from Newtonian mechanics to quantum physics,
we compare and contrast three major themes from each, namely, the
composition of physical objects, their cause-effect relations and the role of
the observer in observing these objects and their relations.

1.1.1. Newtonian Mechanics

     Newtonian mechanics is actually the physics of the ordinary world in
which we live. De Broglie says: “Classical mechanics and physics were
built up in order to give an account of phenomena which operate on an
ordinary, human scale and they are also valid for larger scales, the
astronomical ones.”4 Its conceptual framework embodies many aspects of
the experience of the world around us. Oxford scientist Arthur Peacocke
tells us that the Newtonian perspective “corresponds so well with
intuitions derived from our senses -- the stuff of the world, matter, [which]
possesses energy, and is located in space at a particular time.”5 These
concepts represent, not only the dimensions of the physical world; they
form even part of our conceptual apparatus for perceiving and
understanding the world. “The Newtonian categories of space, time, matter
and causality are so deeply ingrained in our whole perception of reality
that they colour every aspect of the way that we think about life, and we
can't easily imagine a world which mocks their reality.”6 For this reason,
these basic concepts of Newton's mechanics are even believed to be a
priori - given before our experience of the world rather than derived from
experience. Peacocke observes: “The concepts of space, time, matter and
energy continued to appear to be ‘given', self-evident features of the
world, a priori concepts essential to our thinking.”7 In fact, whenever we
engage in any physical activity, we are aware of these dimensions of
physical objects. For instance, each time we drive a car from one place to
another we are, to some extent, conscious of the space between the two
places, and the time it takes to travel between them. The simple act of
opening and closing a door makes us aware of the physical reality of both
the door and our hand, and of cause-effect relation between them.

     Newton's world view can be summarized in the following statement
which refers to the basic components of physical reality, namely, space,
time, matter and motion: “In this receptacle of absolute space and time
there moves material elements or particles, the small, solid, and ultimately
indestructible objects out of which all matter is made.”8 According to
Newtonian mechanics, the physical objects we experience are constituted
out of solid particles of matter or their aggregates which exist or move in
space and time in accordance with fixed physical laws of motion. The
Newtonian model of matter is atomistic; atoms are the basic building
blocks of physical bodies. Everything in the universe, including living
beings, is made up of these atoms and their composites. The most
important property of atoms is occupying space. Hence, we cannot speak
of material atoms without also referring to its spatio-temporal
dimensions.9 In the words of the great philosopher of science Hans
Reichenbach: “Speaking of particles means attributing to them a definite
place and a definite velocity for each time point.”10 Hooker explains in
detail:
       Thus, in the Newtonian ideal, the world consisted of objects
       having precise spatial boundaries and spatiotemporal
       locations, and which were further characterized by a finite
       number of attributes (mass, velocity, acceleration, orientation,
       shape, size, and position). The addition of the electromagnetic
       theory meant that these same Newtonian objects now
       possessed another property — charge.11

     From this point of view, a material particle or a physical object is at a
particular place and at a particular time; and if it is moving, it has a
definite speed. “Classically, a particle — that is, a material object whose
dimensions are small compared to the other relevant spatial distances — is
characterized by a sharp spatial definition and a definite trajectory through
space in time.”12 Further, not only the notion of matter, but also the
concept of motion entails space and time. Edwin Burt suggests that “the
mathematical study of the how of motion, inevitably thrusts into
prominence the concept of space and time.”13

      Although Newtonian mechanics refers to space and time when
speaking of physical objects and motions, this does not mean that they are
intrinsically related to them. Rather, the three-dimensional space and one-
dimensional time function merely as the background where these objects
exist and interact. De Broglie writes: “In prerelativistic physics, space
forms a fixed framework in which the physical phenomena observed by all
imaginable observers are going to take place, a single universal and
absolute time impressing its rhythm on all these observers.”14 Space is
thought to be an empty container of bodies, independent of physical
objects. Like the material stuff, Newton's absolute space is the space of
our everyday experience. Obviously, there is one and only one such space.
It is the space shared by all humanity, the Sun, all planets and stars. We
move through this space in our own ways and at our own speeds; and
regardless of our state of motion, we experience space in the same way.
Space gives us the sense of length, breadth and height. According to the
Newtonian view, length, breadth and height are intrinsic properties of
physical objects; they remain unchanged whether the objects or the
observer move or not.
     Moreover, all changes and motions in the physical world are
described in terms of a separate dimension, namely, time. It has three
dimensions, namely, past, present and future. Newton's concept of time
relies heavily on the notion of simultaneity; all events throughout the
universe are believed to be simultaneous. Simultaneity means that to every
event on Earth at a given moment correspond events in distant regions of
the universe. The propagation of the speed of light (186,000 or 300,000 per
sec) is thought to be instantaneous. Hence, the actual ‘now' and the ‘seen-
now' are regarded as simultaneous, and they are considered synonymous
terms. The philosopher of science Milic Capek says: “In truth, the cosmic
‘Now' is nothing but an enormous extrapolation of our limited
macroscopic experience of ‘Seen now.'”15 Further, according to Newtonian
physics, time passes at the same rate whatever be the speed or position of
the observer.16 Both Newtonian space and time constitute the setting of all
events in the universe, unchanged by the state (motion or rest) of physical
objects or of the observer.

      Now, physical objects interact, and so they are related by causeeffect
links. Newtonian concept of causality affirms deterministic cause-effect
relations in the interactions between physical objects. According to this
view, all physical phenomena in the universe can be reduced to the motion
of material particles or their aggregates, caused by their mutual attraction,
that is, by the force of gravity. The effect of this force is described
mathematically by Newton's equations of motion which are ultimately
based on his three laws of motion.17 These are considered fixed laws
according to which all physical objects move, and they are believed to
account for all changes in the universe. Given the initial conditions of a
moving body and the laws of motion, all its future states can be accurately
determined. Hence, all that happened have definite causes; and whatever
happens will give rise to definite effects. The future of any part of the
system can in principle be predicted with absolute certainty if its state at
any time is known in all details. According to this law of causality, not
only is it possible to predict the future of a physical system in detail, but
even its past can be reconstructed completely. This is the deterministic
interpretation of causality in which prediction becomes the hallmark of
scientific enterprise. Thus, according to Newtonian mechanics, cause-
effect relations are rigorously deterministic.

     Such systems of causes and effects in the universe interact
independently of being observed by observers. From the perspective of
Newtonian mechanics, physical objects exist in their own right with the
properties of mass, length, position and velocity, independently of the
observer. Even though the importance of observation is stressed by
classical science, the role of observer in scientific investigation is not
taken into account. The observer is set apart from the physical system
which is being examined. The function of the observing scientist is to
investigate the world as objectively as possible. Nobel Laureate Ilya
Prigogine and Isabelle Stengers testify that “in the classical view the only
‘objective' description is the complete description of the system as it is,
independent of the choice of how it is observed.”18 Hence, according to
Newtonian mechanics, physical objects and systems exist independently of
observers who examine them without in any way influencing them.
Physical objects would be what they are whether they are being observed
or not.19

1.1.2. Quantum Physics

     The theory of relativity and quantum physics have indeed
accomplished radical paradigm shifts in physics. These two great theories
have challenged the foundations of the classical world of Newtonian
mechanics. In no other science we witness such far-reaching scientific
revolutions taking place. In fact, a double paradigm shift has occurred:
from Newtonian physics to the theory of relativity, and from Newton's
theory to quantum mechanics. These were profound scientific
transformations which have questioned the foundations of Newtonian
physics. Capek remarks about the impact of these scientific upheavals that
have taken place in physics since the year 1900:

       [N]ot only did its [of Newtonian physics] roof collapse, but
       even the very foundations had to be rebuilt. All fundamental
       classical concepts had to be either given up or profoundly
       revised: space, time, matter, motion, causality. It is very
       difficult to deal separately with each of these concepts since a
       change of one is related to the changes in the others.20

      Physicist Brian Greene shares a similar view on the breathtaking
transformations that have taken place with the coming of the theory of
relativity and quantum physics:

       One measure of the depth of a physical theory is the extent to
       which it poses serious challenges to the aspects of our
       worldview that had previously seemed immutable. By this
       measure, quantum mechanics and the theories of relativity are
       deep beyond anyone's wildest expectations: Wave functions,
       probabilities, quantum tunneling, the ceaseless roiling energy
       fluctuations of the vacuum, the smearing together of space
       and time, the relative nature of simultaneity, the warping of
       the space-time fabric, black holes, the big bang. Who could
       have guessed that the intuitive, mechanical, clockwork
       Newtonian perspective would turn out to be so thoroughly
       parochial - that there was a whole new mind-boggling world
       lying just beneath the surface of things as they are ordinarily
       experienced?21

     De Broglie remarks about the paradigm shift occasioned by the
coming of quantum mechanics: “On that day, [when the quantum was
introduced into science] the vast and grandiose edifice of classical physics
found itself shaken to its very foundations, without anyone very clearly
realizing it at first. In the history of the intellectual world there have been
few upheavals comparable to this.”22 Similarly, Harold Schillling suggests:
“The fact is that almost none of the fundamental concepts that have been
so potent in macromechanics - such as size, or position and distance, or
time and time interval, mass, velocity, momentum - can be used with
respect to the microworld without radical modification of their meanings
and of the rules for their use.”23
     Quantum mechanics is the physics of subatomic world, also called
‘quantum world' or ‘microcosm.' It is the science of the world of
subatomic particles, such as photons, protons, electrons, neutrons, hadrons
and quarks, and of the four forces, namely, gravitational, electromagnetic,
strong nuclear and weak nuclear forces. Although this quantum world is
rationally comprehensible, it cannot be visualized like the Newtonian
world of everyday experience. That is not because the subatomic particles
are very small, but because the visual conventions we adopt from the
world of ordinary objects and from Newtonian mechanics do not apply to
quantum entities. For example, we can visualize a stone which is both at
rest and at a precise place. But it is meaningless to speak of a quantum
particle such as an electron resting at a point in space. In order to speak
about such weird quantum objects, physicists employ imposing
mathematical systems, like Heisenberg's matrix mechanics and
Schrödinger's wave mechanics which are very remote from our ordinary
conceptions and modes of thinking.

     Hopefully we get a general idea of quantum physics by discussing
briefly its important concepts in comparison with the corresponding
notions in Newtonian mechanics; these are quantum objects, cause-effect
link among them, and relation of the observer to the observed quantum
system. Peacocke refers to these important concepts of quantum
mechanics when he says:

       Furthermore, under the impact of the need to adopt wave
       particle complementarity for small particles and the
       acceptance of the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle, the ideal
       of classical physics, of the objective observer who rationally
       describes the properties of the world as they exist
       independently of his observations, had become untenable.24

     According to quantum physics, physical objects cannot be analyzed
into solid, indestructible, material particles existing or moving in space
and time as held by Newton. Rather, subatomic particles, such as photons
and electrons, have the characteristics of both particles and waves. In
some contexts, they behave as particles and in others as waves. For
example, photons which are particles of light behave as particles under
appropriate conditions, and as waves in other situations. Further, we
cannot think of elementary particles as existing like physical objects of
our ordinary experience. Quantum physicists tell us that a quantum
particle such as an electron exists or evolves as a ‘superposition' of all its
possibilities. We find here the greatest contrast between Newtonian solid
particles and quantum wave-particles which are an ensemble of
possibilities rather than a collection of actually existing properties.

     Moreover, Newtonian concepts of space and time are not adequate to
describe quantum objects. They have been radically modified in quantum
mechanics. De Broglie argues:

       Without doubt general relativity has already taught us to
       consider the local properties of space-time as being dependent
       on the distribution of matter in the universe. But the
       modification that the presence of quanta requires is even
       much more profound and no longer permits us to represent the
       motion of a physical unit by a line in space-time (world-line);
       . . .25

In a sense, a quantum object operates ‘outside time' manifesting itself as a
discontinuous succession of instantaneous transitions. Thus, the quantum
jump of an electron from one orbit to another does not occur as a
continuous passage through intermediate positions; it does not have a
trajectory. In a way, it occurs ‘outside (ordinary) space,' by local
occupations without journeys between them. In the quantum world, we
must, as Niels Bohr says, ‘transcend' the usual frameworks of space and
time.26 Physicist Lee Smolin aptly remarks: “This state space, where the
quantum states live, is very different from the three-dimensional space in
which we seem to live.”27 Hence, quantum events cannot be said to take
place in the space of our ordinary experience. This oddity of quantum
objects and events is wrought about by Heisenberg's uncertainty principle.
De Broglie tells us: “[T]he existence of these uncertainties [of Heisenberg]
warns us that the space and time of classical physics, well-defined and
perfectly usable on the macroscopic level, cease to be perfectly adequate
for the description of physical reality on the level of atoms and
electrons.”28 Smolin explains:

       Why doesn't quantum theory allow us a simple and intuitive
       picture of phenomena, as things happening in ordinary space?
       The reason is that it seems intrinsically impossible for one
       observer to have all of the information that would be
       necessary to give a complete description of any quantum
       system in nature. It seems that, whatever part of the world we
       are studying, we are allowed to know at most half of the
       information that would be necessary to fully describe it. This
       limitation is called Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle, and it is
       this, above everything else, that makes the real quantum world
       different from our Newtonian imaginings.29

     Furthermore, Heisenberg's uncertainty principle that effects the
modification of space and time, wreaks havoc with the Newtonian concept
of causality. In quantum physics, causality appears to have collapsed. Paul
Davies asserts: “The central feature of quantum physics is the
disintegration of the cause-effect link.”30 In another context he says:

       Quantum physics wrecked the orderly, yet sterile Laplacian
       scheme. Physicists learned that at the atomic level matter and
       motion are vague and unpredictable. Particles can behave
       erratically, rebelling against rigidly prescribed motions,
       turning up in unexpected places without discernible reason
       and even appearing or disappearing without warning.31

     Cause-effect relation in the quantum world is governed by
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle. This principle affirms fundamental
uncertainty in the behaviour of quantum objects. Uncertainty relation
expresses a trade-off in the degree of certainty about the values of
conjugate quantities, such as position and its complementary quantity,
velocity. Thus, the position and velocity of an electron cannot be
simultaneously determined with certainty. By the same token, quantum
physics in effect abandons the classical, deterministic concept of causality.
Ruth Reyna clarifies:

       That the values of conjugated parameters [like position and
       velocity] when measured simultaneously are indeterminate is
       now an accepted law of particle physics, and the deterministic
       conception of causality is given up as a result of this
       uncertainty in our data. In so far as knowledge is concerned,
       causality in the intuitive sense becomes meaningless. But the
       classical theory of deterministic causality (if it has ever held)
       is replaced by a statistical conception of event.32

     However, causality is not altogether absent in quantum physics, but it
has taken a different modality; that is, individual quantum events do not
always have well-defined causes. If an atom, for example, is excited by a
collision with another atom, it will usually return quickly to its lowest
energy state by emitting a photon. Such emitting of photon is naturally an
outcome of the atom's excited state. We can certainly say that the
excitation caused the production of photon. In that sense, there is a cause-
effect relation. Nevertheless, the actual moment of the production of
photon is unpredictable; it can happen at any moment. Physicists can
predict only the probable appearance of photon, but they cannot know for
certain when this event will actually take place.33

     Now, in such causal interactions of quantum objects, the observer
appears to be crucially involved. In fact, quantum mechanics has radically
modified the classical, Newtonian assumptions about the relation between
the observer and the observed physical system. According to this view, the
physicist cannot merely be a spectator of the quantum world s/he is
observing. Physicist Richard Schlegel contrasts the roles of observer in
classical physics and in quantum mechanics:

       The classical physicist who could sit, as it were, on one side of
       a translucent screen with his thoughts and experiences,
       viewing the world he studied on the other, is now the
       impossible spectator. For much of physics the dividing screen
       is lost, and cannot be replaced. Especially on the level of
       individual atomic processes the scientist now finds that he in
       fact has a role in the creation of the world that he is
       describing. It is not . . . that his emotions bias his results, but
       rather that his act of observation participates in forming the
       natural world. . . . even in so traditionally a model of an
       objective science as physics the completely uninvolved
       spectator has been shown to be an impossibility.34

     The observer is no longer a spectator of the world ‘out there,' but is
involved in the measurement/observation of subatomic particles. Physicist
Heinz Pagels opines: “What is actually going on in the quantum world
depends on how we decide to observe it. The world just isn't ‘there'
independent of our observing it; what is ‘there' depends in part on what we
choose to see — reality is partially created by the observer.”35 Pagels
comments on the dependence of an electron on the observer: “The electron
seems to spring into existence as a real object only when we observe it!”36
As we shall see later, eminent physicists, like Niels Bohr, Heisenberg,
Eugene Wigner, John Von Neumann and John Wheeler, have strongly
affirmed the fundamental role of the observer in the quantum world.

     The observer's involvement in the subatomic world takes on two
modalities: the measurement of quantum objects and the production of
their properties.37 Many physicists affirm that the observer is intimately
linked to the process of measurement of quantum objects. These entities
do not exist like the objects of our ordinary experience. An unobserved
electron, for instance, exists only as an indeterminate set of all its
possibilities. None of these possibilities has any actuality unless it is
observed. This means that possibilities become actual when a
measurement is taken or an observation is made. Moreover, some
physicists further suggest that even the properties of quantum objects do
not exist unless they are observed. In classical physics, properties of
physical objects, such as mass and other physical dimensions, are
considered their inherent attributes. But in quantum mechanics, properties
of quantum objects are not intrinsic to the objects, but they are the
outcome of interactions between the observed objects and the observer.
Hence, the observer is necessary, not only to measure/observe quantum
objects, but even to define their properties; and so we cannot speak about
the properties of a quantum object as such. They are meaningful only in
the context of the object's interaction with the observer.38 Pagels contrasts
the classical view of the objectivity of the world with that of quantum
physics:

       The Copenhagen interpretation of the new quantum theory
       ended the classical idea of objectivity — the idea that the
       world has a definite state of existence independent of our
       observing it. This contrasts with our ordinary experience of
       the world, which supports the classical view of objectivity that
       the world goes on even if we do not perceive it. Wake up in
       the morning and the world exists much as you left it. But the
       Copenhagen interpretation maintains that if we look closely at
       the world -- at the level of atoms — then its actual state of
       existence depends in part on how we observe it and what we
       choose to see. . . .The atomic world simply does not exist in a
       definite state until we actually set up an apparatus and observe
       it.39

     We wind up our discussion with a quote from Peacocke about the
extent of the modification of classical concepts brought about by quantum
physics:

       After such radical transformation of the basic classical
       concepts of space, time, matter, and motion, very little is left
       of the traditional corpuscular-kinetic scheme of nature. It is
       natural that classical determinism of the Laplacian type is
       threatened when the scheme on which it was based is
       disintegrating. Not a single constituent concept of this
       Laplacian model of the universe remains unaffected; what has
       been left intact by the relativity theory was challenged by the
       theory of quanta or wave mechanics.40

To trace the history of this great revolution in physics, we now turn.
1.2. A Historical Overview of Quantum Physics

     The contemporary history of quantum physics can be broadly divided
into three periods: the age of discoveries, the period of mathematical
formulation and later developments. The first stage includes the discovery
of wave-like behaviour of light by Thomas Young, its discrete nature by
Max Planck and its particle-like character by Einstein. During the period
of mathematical formulation, quantum mechanics was developed as a
theory of physics by great physicists, like Louis de Broglie, Werner
Heisenberg, Erwin Schrödinger, Niels Bohr, Max Born and Pascual Jordan.
Later developments comprise quantum field theories including the
proposed quantum theory of gravity.

1.2.1. The Age of Discoveries in Quantum Physics

     Quantum mechanics has its origin in the scientific investigations on
the nature of light: whether a light beam consists of a stream of particles
like pellets fired from a gun, or it is a continuous, unbroken wave akin to
waves on the surface of an ocean.41 Isaac Newton held the particle
hypothesis: that light is composed of particles which were called
‘corpuscles.' His particle view prevailed until the year 1800. The first
staunch proponent of the wave theory of light was Newton's contemporary,
the Dutch scientist Christiaan Huygens. In 1801, Thomas Young's famous
double-slit experiment conclusively proved that light has a wave-like
character. He showed that light produces interference patterns which are
clear indications of the wave nature of light. James Clerk Maxwell in 1865
proposed the theory of electromagnetism which predicted also the wave
character of light.

     The giant step towards the invention of quantum theory was taken by
Max Planck in the year 1900. He is one of the founders of quantum
mechanics. Planck discovered that energy comes in ‘packets' or ‘bundles.'
He arrived at this concept of discreteness of energy by examining the
phenomenon of black body radiation.42 Planck's investigations confirmed
that light is emitted in discrete units or packets of energy. He called each
packet a ‘quantum.' Further, Planck discovered that the energy of a light
particle is proportional to its frequency. Thus, high frequency light such as
violet light has short wavelength and high energy; and low frequency light
like red light has long wavelength and low energy.43 Although Planck's
proposals broke with the Newtonian past, it was not radical enough. Most
physicists, including Planck, thought that light was a wave-like
phenomenon in accordance with the view of nature as continuum.44
Actually, his work on black body radiation showed that light behaves as if
it consists of particles because light is emitted or absorbed as discrete
packets of energy. However, Planck hesitated to admit that these bundles
of energy could be identified with particles.

      It was up to Einstein to complete the theory of light. He went beyond
Planck to make the radical assumption that light itself consists of
particles. Einstein was led to this insight by his investigations of the
phenomenon of photoelectric effect. When a beam of light falls on a
metallic surface, the beam ejects electrons from the metal, precisely one at
a time as though individual particles of light (individual photons) were
hitting electrons and knocking them out of the metal's surface one by one.
Einstein suggested that in photoelectric effect, light behaves as if it
consists of individual particles, each of which carries a definite amount of
energy; and he formulated the law of photoelectric effect. But unlike
Planck's theory about the discreteness of energy, which was immediately
tested experimentally, there was simply no way to confirm Einstein's
photoelectric equation by experiment. Hence, Einstein's hypothesis of the
particle nature of light was not readily accepted by his contemporaries;
and there was great resistance from the part of scientific community at
large. Most physicists including Planck believed that light is a continuous
electromagnetic wave in accordance with the view of nature as continuum.
It was not until 1923 that there was sufficient experimental evidence for
photoelectric theory. Thus, Planck and Einstein ushered in a new era in
physics. Together, they accomplished a radical transformation of classical
physics. Planck's idea of the quantum of energy, further developed by
Einstein as particle, implied that nature cannot be thought of as
continuum. Matter and energy were shown to be discrete.
      The next step forward in the development of quantum mechanics was
taken by Niels Bohr in 1913. His contribution relates to the structure of
atoms. Using the concept of the quantum, he was able to describe the way
in which electrons are arranged within atoms, and to explain the pattern of
light emitted by atoms like hydrogen. Bohr speculated that the electron's
orbits are arranged at specific distances from the nucleus of atom; and that
when it absorbs energy (photons), electrons ‘jump' outward from the orbit
closest to nucleus (‘ground state' of atom) by absorbing energy and
eventually return to this orbit, in the process emitting energy (photons)
equal to the energy that it absorbed in jumping outward. Bohr suggested
that when a little energy is available (low heat), only a small amount
(packet) of energy is absorbed by electrons, and they do not jump out very
far from nucleus. When they return to their ground state, they emit a small
quantity (packet) of energy like that of red light. But when more energy is
available (high heat), larger amount of energy is absorbed by electrons;
they make bigger jumps outward and, on returning, they emit larger
quantities of energy like those of blue and violet light. Therefore, over low
heat, a metal piece glows red, and over high heat, it glows blue-white.

     By this time, most of the quantum physicists had accepted the
hypothesis that light particles or photons behave sometimes as waves and
sometimes as particles. But they did not realize that subatomic particles,
like electrons or protons, might also similarly behave as waves or
particles. This proposal was the next step in the development of quantum
physics. Louis de Broglie suggested that the wave-particle concept can be
applied, not only to light but to all matter particles as well. He reasoned by
analogy that if light which is a wave, could sometimes behave like a
stream of particles (photons), then an electron, clearly a particle, could
also sometimes behave like a wave. De Broglie's ideas were presented in
two papers in September 1923, in which he deduced the wavelength of
electron. He suggested that his idea could be experimentally confirmed if
electrons showed interference phenomena like waves. In the mid-1920s,
experiments conducted by Clinton Davisson and Lester Gerner confirmed
that electrons do exhibit interference patterns associated with waves.
Hence, electrons embody wave-like character together with their more
familiar picture as particles. Later experiments showed that other
particles, like protons and neutrons, also have similar wavelike nature.
Thus, we have experimental confirmation that all matter particles have
wave-like character.

1.2.2. The Period of Mathematical Formulation

     However, it was not until the late 1920s with the work of Werner
Heisenberg and Erwin Schrödinger that the concepts of light and matter as
both waves and particles were mathematically formulated. Heisenberg in
the year 1925 proposed a mathematical formalism called ‘matrix
mechanics.' In matrix mechanics, the physical properties of a particle,
such as its position and momentum, energy and time, were represented by
mathematical objects called ‘matrices' which are generalizations of the
idea of simple numbers. Simple numbers obey the Boolean commutative
law of multiplication; that is, the result of multiplication does not depend
on the order in which it is carried out. For instance, (3 x 6) = (6 x 3) = I8.
But matrix multiplication depends on the order in which it is carried out.
For example, if A and B are matrices, then A x B does not have to equal B
x A. The main idea of matrix mechanics is that physical variables like
position q and momentum p of a particle are not simple numbers but
matrices. Max Born and Pascual Jordan wrote a paper extending
Heisenberg's ideas, pointing out the importance of matrix algebra for
describing atomic energy transitions. Indeed, matrices rather than simple
numbers represent the correct language for describing the behaviour of
subatomic particles. Matrix mechanics was the first logically consistent
formulation of quantum physics; it completely describes all phenomena of
the quantum world. Matrix mechanics interprets the physical properties of
subatomic particles as matrices that evolve in time. It is equivalent to
Schrödinger's formulation of quantum theory called ‘wave mechanics.'

     Schrödinger's paper on wave mechanics appeared in 1926. He
expanded on de Broglie's idea that a certain type of wave could be
associated with subatomic particles. Since the equation which Schrödinger
developed is based on the physics of waves, his formulation is known as
‘wave mechanics.' In this mathematical formalism of quantum theory, the
behaviour of all quantum systems is described in terms of ‘wave function'
which evolves according to the law called ‘Schrödinger wave equation.' It
is applied to all sorts of quantum phenomena. Wave function is an abstract
mathematical ‘representation' of the state of a quantum system. Both
Heisenberg's matrix mechanics and Schrödinger's wave mechanics provide
correct descriptions of all quantum phenomena. In fact, Schrödinger
himself demonstrated that wave mechanics and matrix mechanics are
mathematically equivalent. A physicist working on a problem in quantum
physics can now choose any one of the two mathematical formalisms
which is applicable to his work. These mathematical frameworks of
quantum theory are essentially the same as those which are still in use
today. Thus, by the end of 1926 quantum mechanics had two apparently
different mathematical formalisms – Heisenberg's matrix mechanics and
Schrödinger's wave mechanics.

     With these theoretical developments, quantum theory finally
provided an answer to the question, whether a quantum object, such as a
photon or an electron, is a wave or a particle. The mathematics of quantum
theory permitted both wave-like and particle-like representations of
quantum objects. But obviously these two concepts are opposed and are in
conflict with each other. The problem is, how can we talk about an object
in terms of two such incompatible ideas? It was Niels Bohr's turn to
handle this problem. He suggested that the function of quantum physics is
not to represent what quantum objects are, but how we can think and talk
about them. Bohr emphasized that when we are putting a question to
nature, we must also specify the experimental arrangement that we would
use to determine the answer. In one experiment, an electron may exhibit
wave-like properties, and in another it may behave as a particle.

     In other words, it is the kind of experimental arrangement that
enables one to observe the quantum object as particle or as wave. Bohr
called wave and particle ‘complementary concepts' which are different
representations of the same object. Bohr's principle of complementarity
states that the same quantum object possesses complementary properties,
and that the knowledge of the one excludes the knowledge of the other. We
may therefore describe an object like an electron in ways which are
mutually exclusive — as wave or as particle — without logical
contradiction provided we also realize that the experimental arrangements
that determine these descriptions are similarly also mutually exclusive.
Bohr proposed the principle of complementarity in 1927. It was around
this time that Heisenberg invented uncertainty principle. It states that two
conjugate quantities of a quantum object, such as position and velocity,
cannot be simultaneously measured with equal precision. If its position is
measured with certainty, then its velocity cannot be measured
simultaneously with the same certainty, and vice versa. The same
uncertainty principle is applicable also to other conjugate quantities, such
as energy and time.

     Thus, Heisenberg and Bohr, each in his own style made new
breakthroughs in quantum physics. Bohr's principle of complementarity
and Heisenberg's uncertainty principle together constitute the foundations
of what is known as the ‘Copenhagen interpretation' of quantum
mechanics. This view has convinced most of the physicists about the
correctness of quantum physics. The Copenhagen interpretation
magnificently revealed the internal consistency of quantum theory -- a
consistency which was purchased at the price of renouncing causal
determinism and objective knowledge of the quantum world.45 Quantum
mechanics reached its full flowering in the late 1920s. Ilya Prigogine and
Isabelle Stengers remark about the theoretical developments of this great
theory during the period we are considering:

       Thus we reach the decisive years 1925-27, a ‘golden age' of
       [quantum] physics. During this short period, Heisenberg,
       Born, Jordan, Schrödinger, and Dirac made quantum physics
       into a consistent new theory. This theory incorporates
       Einstein's and de Broglie's wave-particle duality in the
       framework of a new generalized form of dynamics: quantum
       mechanics.46

    Further, Richard Feynman has made significant contributions to
quantum mechanics in the 1940s. His formulation of quantum theory is
known as ‘sum-over-histories'/‘sum-over-paths' or ‘path integral
formalism.' This method is a tool for computing the quantum mechanical
probabilities, for instance, of the ‘flight' of quantum particles from one
point to another. It is contrasted with the classical method of computation
which considers a single, unique trajectory of the motion of a particle, say,
from location A to site B. Based on the initial conditions of the particle,
and the forces acting on it, classical physics predicts with certainty its path
every moment, and finally the time of its arrival at the destination. (See
Figure 1) There is only just one unique, linear trajectory and only one
space-time framework for the motion of the particle.47




  Figure 1. The classical trajectory of a particle from A to B
     Feynman's path integral formalism replaces this classical notion of a
unique trajectory of a particle with an infinity of quantum mechanically
possible paths. This is a formulation of quantum physics in which particles
are believed to travel from one point to another along all possible paths
between them. Feynman's method considers all possibilities of a particle
travelling from, say, location A to site B. The quantum particle traverses
every possible trajectory between source and destination, simultaneously
moving through countless loops and making numerous diversions. (See
Figure 2) Each one of these paths will have a certain probability associated
with it. The crucial point here is that these different probabilities have a
wave-like character. Hence, if we sum over all the probabilities of all
paths, then the different probabilities will reinforce or cancel each other,
and so the only path which survives this interference process is the one
that the particle actually follows. Greene comments: “Feynman showed
that he could assign a number to each of these paths in such a way that
their combined average yields exactly the same result for the probability
calculated using the wave-function approach.”48 The resulting sum tells us
the probability of detecting the particle that started out at location A
reaching the location B at the specified time.49
Figure 2. Six possible paths of a quantum particle from A to
                              B
     With the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics in place,
physicists saw new visions on the scientific horizon - the unification of
quantum physics with Einstein's theory of relativity. The ultimate goal of
particle physicists in this project is the Theory of Everything which is
often called the ‘Holy Grail of Physics.'50 We now pass on to a short
history of this great search.

1.2.3. Later Developments in Quantum Physics

      Once the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics was more
or less complete, it became evident to physicists that for a comprehensive
theory of subatomic particles and forces of nature, quantum physics must
be incorporated with the theory of relativity. Such is the origin of
relativistic quantum field theories which attempt to unify special theory of
relativity and quantum mechanics. Important steps towards the unification
of these two theories were taken by Heisenberg, Born and Jordan in the
years 1926-28, and by Eugene Wigner and Wolfgang Pauli in 1929-30. The
new concept advanced for this purpose was that of ‘quantum field.' It was
proposed that there are different kinds of fields, like electromagnetic field
and gravitational field, and that each field has an associated particle.
Fields are the fundamental entities which manifest themselves as particles.
This is the basic postulate of quantum field theory. Its fundamental laws
were in place by the 1930s.

     Since then, quantum field theory has been enhanced, amplified and
applied to quantum particles and fields. It attempts to interpret the four
forces of nature (gravitational, electromagnetic, strong nuclear and weak
nuclear forces) as particle interactions mediated by ‘virtual particles;'
these function as ‘exchange particles' or ‘force-carriers.' The theory of
virtual particles was worked out in the 1940s by J. Schwinger, Richard
Feynman and S. Tomonaga. Each of the four fundamental forces of nature
has an associated exchange particle. The force-carrier associated with
electromagnetic interaction is called ‘virtual photon;' the electromagnetic
interaction between two charged particles is attributed to the exchange of
these virtual photons. This quantum field theory is called ‘quantum
electrodynamics' or QED for short. The electroweak theory is the
unification of electromagnetism and weak interaction. The quantum field
theory of strong nuclear interaction incorporating special theory of
relativity is called ‘quantum chromodynamics' or QCD. The success of the
unification of electromagnetic and weak interactions led to a number of
attempts to combine electroweak theory with quantum chromodynamics
into a Grand Unified Theory or GUT.

     Further developments in quantum field theory attempt to bring
gravity into the fold, and formulate a fully unified field theory. For this,
the first step is the invention of a quantum theory of gravity. That is,
quantum theory has to be unified with the general theory of relativity
which is first and foremost a theory of gravity. Quantum gravity governs
the Planck regime where space-time curvature supposedly becomes
enormous - at the Planck time of 10-43 sec, and the Planck length of 10-33
cm, with the density of mass/energy at 1093 gm/cc, and temperatures above
1032 degree Kelvin.51 The quantum theory of gravity supposedly would
provide the theoretical framework for a satisfactory description of space-
time domain at the Planck magnitudes. But in spite of the strenuous work
of some of the finest particle physicists in the world, an adequate quantum
theory of gravity has not yet emerged. Nevertheless, reputed physicists,
like Stephen Hawking, James Hartle and John Wheeler, have dared to
make some bold speculations regarding the space-time structure
prevailing at the Planck dimensions. At these scales, there is no longer a
time dimension, but only four space-like dimensions. Such a state of
physical reality is called ‘quantum vacuum' or ‘superspacetime.' The
essential property of quantum vacuum is its fluctuation. This consists in
particles and anti-particles appearing out of the vacuum and disappearing
in an extremely short time, permitted by Heisenberg's uncertainty
principle.

     Quantum cosmology is a sequel to quantum field theories. Physicists,
like Andrei Linde, Alex Vilenkin and Edward Tryon, have put forward
theories, known as ‘chaotic inflation' and ‘eternal inflation' which suggest
that our universe originated as a result of some primordial quantum
vacuum fluctuation. The theories of quantum creation of the universe are
complemented by the theory of quantum destruction. Sydney Colman and
Frank de Lucia have theorized about the destruction of the universe as a
result of the unpredictable behaviour of quantum vacuum.52

    We conclude the present chapter with an ‘outrageous' quote on
quantum mechanics by Richard Feynman and a comment by Greene.
Feynman wrote in 1965:

       There was a time when the newspapers said that only twelve
       men understood the theory of relativity. I do not believe that
       there ever was such a time. There might have been a time
       when only one man did because he was the only guy who
       caught on, before he wrote his paper. But after people read the
       paper a lot of people understood the theory of relativity in one
       way or other, certainly more than twelve. On the other hand I
       think I can safely say that nobody understands quantum
       mechanics.53

     Green observes that although Feynman expressed this view in 1965, it
applies equally well today. What Feynman meant was that although the
special and general theories of relativity require a drastic revision of
previous ways of understanding the universe, nevertheless when one fully
accepts the basic principles underlying them, the new and unfamiliar
implications for space and time follow directly by careful logical
reasoning. Quantum mechanics is different. Just as special and general
theories require dramatic changes in our world view when things are
moving very fast or when they are very massive, quantum mechanics
reveals that the universe has equally, if not more, startling properties when
examined on atomic and subatomic scales. To be sure, many of the
mathematical formalisms and rules of quantum mechanics were in place
by the year 1928; and ever since, they have been used to make stunningly
precise and successful predictions. Nevertheless, the scientists who
employ these formulae and rules do so without really understanding why
these laws work or what they really mean. Greene concludes: “Unlike
relativity, few if any people ever grasp quantum mechanics at a ‘soulful'
level.”54
                       2
        AN OVERVIEW OF QUANTUM PHYSICS
       The discovery of quantum theory produced the most profound
       modification of Newtonian physics that has occurred since the
       publication of the Principia [Mathematica].

                 –John Polkinghorne, The Quantum World

     The present chapter is in fact a sequel to the last chapter, “Towards
Quantum Physics.” The latter introduced quantum physics in contrast to
Newtonian mechanics; the historical survey presented the developments of
the important concepts of quantum theory in a chronological order. In the
present text, we deal with most of these notions thematically. It starts with
the idea of the quantum itself, that is, discreteness at the foundations of
physical reality. The twin pillars of quantum physics are wave-particle
duality and Heisenberg's uncertainty principle; and its foundation is the
wave function. The wave function is believed to collapse when quantum
objects/events are observed. In fact, these are all counter-intuitive ideas
that are contrary to classical/Newtonian physics and our common sense
perception and understanding of the world. Quantum physics thus presents
a concept of physical reality that is strange or ‘ab-normal' in the literal
sense of the word. In spite of this fact, we discuss finally some proposals
made by great physicists on the nature of quantum reality.

2.1. The Quantum World

     We start our discourse on quantum physics at the very beginning with
the quantum itself. The meaning of the quantum can be best clarified by
contrasting it with the continuum, the hallmark of classical mechanics,
both Newtonian and Einsteinian. The continuum (continuity) and the
quantum (discreteness) are the two overarching concepts which
differentiate between classical physics and quantum mechanics
respectively.
2.1.1. The Continuum and the Quantum

      The classical physics - the Newtonian mechanics and the theory of
relativity -- is characterized by the continuum. It is the foundational
concept of these two great systems of physics. The continuum is in fact a
simple, ordinary concept. “A continuum is something whose parts are so
close together, so ‘arbitrarily small,' that the continuum really cannot be
broken down into them. There are no breaks in a continuum. It is called a
continuum because it flows continuously.”1 Basically, continuum is a
mathematical concept; a line, a surface and a piece of metal are examples
of continuum. Thus, a line drawn on a paper is one-dimensional continuum.
The line flows continuously from one end to the other. Similarly, the
surface of a wall is twodimensional continuum. All points on its surface are
in contact with other points. A three-dimensional continuum is any object
in three dimensions, like a table or a chair. Space is a three-dimensional
continuum with three dimensions of length, breadth and depth. We
ordinarily think that physical objects of the world around us, and the
framework of space and time in which they exist and move have the
character of continuum.

     Before Max Planck proposed the idea of the quantum, most of the
physicists conceived of the world of nature as a continuum. “They thought
of the forms of matter blending into one another in a smooth, continuous
way. Various physical quantities like energy, momentum, and spin were
continuous and could take on any value.”2 Newtonian mechanics is the
science of the world of our ordinary experience, and its fundamental
concepts represent continuous quantities. David Bohm says: “Newton's
basic concepts of absolute space and time, and matter and motion imply
continuity or homogeneity which is the hall mark of Newtonian
mechanism.”3 Thus, according to Newtonian physics, objects are said to
exist in a continuum of space and time. Their actions and movements are
also regarded as continuous quantities. Consider, for instance, a person
shooting with a gun at a target 20 meters away. If s/he is a sharp shooter,
the target is directly hit. The whole operation takes place within a
continuum. The gun and the bullet -- the initial conditions -- are whole and
entire together, and function as one continuous unit.4 Further, the action of
shooting is executed within the co-ordinates of space and time which
constitute a continuous framework. The point here is not merely that the
bullet flies continuously to the target. Of course, it does. But more than
that, it is the space-and-time continuum that makes possible the execution
of such an act. The causal action of the bullet hitting the target is
accomplished within the continuum of space and time. Physicist Paul
Davies writes: “Central to this belief [causeeffect relation] is the
assumption that space and time are continuous, so that events which occur
in one place and time can influence those that occur at other places and
times.”5 That is to say, the cause-effect link is made possible by the space-
and-time continuum.

      Moreover, the continuum is the fundamental concept, not only in
Newtonian mechanics, but also in Einstein's theory of relativity. As a
classical physicist, Einstein firmly held on to the postulate of continuum in
physics. He says: “It is further characteristic of these physical objects that
they are thought of as arranged in a spacetime continuum.”6 Bohm suggests
that “relativity theory requires continuity, strict causality (or determinism)
and locality. On the other hand, quantum theory requires non-continuity,
non-causality and non-locality. So the basic concepts of relativity and
quantum theory directly contradict each other.”7 Thus, in the special theory,
space-time structure functions as the continuous background of uniform
motions of physical objects. Space-time continuum constitutes the
background of all motions in the world; and it stays on as the universal
setting even if all mass/energy in the universe is removed. But in the
general theory, space-time-mass-energy is itself the ultimate continuum. It
is the fundamental matrix out of which all physical objects and events in
the universe emerge.

     The concept of continuum has thus validity in the classical physics of
Newtonian mechanics and in the theory of relativity. It functions as the
fundamental postulate of the physics of macrocosm of our every day
experience where Newton's theory is valid, and also of the megacosm of
galaxies and stars, where the theory of relativity is applicable. But the
concept of continuum has some fundamental limitations: it cannot be
applied to the Big Bang regime and to the subatomic world of quantum
mechanics. The continuum thus does not apply to the whole spectrum of
physical reality. Hawking speaks about the inapplicability of the continuum
in the Big Bang domain: “All our theories of science are formulated on the
assumption that space-time is smooth [continuous] and nearly flat, so that
they would all break down at the big bang singularity, where the curvature
of space-time is infinite.”8 Thus, ‘the wall of Planck time at 10-43 second'9
severely constrains the applicability of continuum. In fact, the Big Bang
singularity is the ultimate consequence of applying uncritically the general
theory of relativity (which presupposes the continuum) to the curvature of
space-time ‘beyond' the Planck time, all ‘the way down' to the origin of the
universe. Moreover, the concept of continuum has no validity in the
quantum world of subatomic particles. As we saw, this was precisely
Planck's discovery: that energy is not emitted continuously, but in discrete
quantities. Indeed, the continuum is an invalid concept in the subatomic
world.

     In stark contrast, the quantum discreteness is the fundamental
postulate of the microcosm -- the world of subatomic particles, like
photons, protons, electrons, neutrons and their anti-particles, and of the
four forces, namely, gravitational, electromagnetic, strong nuclear and
weak nuclear forces. The most fundamental character of this quantum
world is discreteness or discontinuity. “Quantum theory is a theory of
discontinuity -- its very nature makes it so.”10 The concepts of continuum
and quantum (discreteness) are in complete contrast, and are incompatible.
Philosopher J. R. Lucas suggests that the doctrine of the continuum denies
“on the one hand the discreteness and on the other hand the gappiness of
space and time.”11 The concept of discreteness can be clarified with a
simple example. Suppose we are talking about the increase or decrease in
the population of a city. The smallest amount which the number of people
can increase or decrease is by one person. It cannot increase by .7 person. It
can increase or decrease by fifteen people, but not by 15.27 people. The
population can get larger or smaller only in jumps, and the smallest jump
that it can make is one whole person; hence, it is evident that population
can fluctuate only by a whole number of people. In the language of physics,
a population can change only in discrete amounts or discontinuously. In
quantum mechanics, we talk of the discreteness of energy. The smallest
possible amount or unit of discrete energy is called the ‘quantum.'12 It was
Planck, we saw, who introduced this concept of discreteness in physics; he
showed that energy exists as discrete packets called ‘quanta.' That is,
energy is ‘quantized.'

     Indeed, discreteness is the overarching concept in quantum mechanics.
Discreteness defines the quantum world. Quantum objects are nothing if
they are not discrete. Everything in the subatomic world is discrete quanta.
All actions, all motions, all processes in the microcosm come in discrete,
indivisible units. Bohm contrasts the discreteness of action with the
classical continuity of movement:

       Action of every kind is of this discrete indivisible nature
       (whether of particles or of fields). The apparent continuity that
       is commonly observed arises because the individual quanta are
       very small. An ordinarily visible movement therefore has a
       very large number of discrete jumps, each too small to be
       perceptible (except possibly with the most sensitive of
       instruments). So all apparently continuous large-scale (i.e.,
       classical) motions are to be understood as constituted of
       discrete steps. Such a notion certainly contradicts the older
       classical concept of continuity of movement, which is at the
       very basis of the mechanistic ideas of Newtonian physics.13

As Bohm rightly points out, the discreteness of the quantum world appears
to be at odds with the continuity of Newtonian mechanics, and of the world
we observe around us. The discrete character of the physical objects of our
common sense world is not perceptible through our senses because their
discreteness is exceedingly small. For example, if we look at a huge pile of
wheat from a distance, it appears to be a continuous, smooth hillock. But
upon closer inspection, we recognize that it is made up of tiny grains which
are the discrete units in the pile of wheat. Photographs in newspapers are
also examples of the discreteness of continuous objects. Viewed from afar,
a newspaper photo appears as a continuous picture. But if we look closely
at it, it is seen as consisting of many tiny dots which are its discrete
elements.
     Truly, discreteness is at the foundation of the quantum world.
Physicists have pointed out this fundamental character of discreteness in
various facets of the subatomic world. De Broglie speaks of the ‘quantum
of action.'14 Similarly, the space-time of quantum world would have to be
discrete in contrast to the continuous space and time framework of classical
physics. R. Blanché contends: ‘‘We must expect to see even space and time
returned to the granular [discrete] structure of elementary quanta.''15 He
continues: “If we so choose, however, there is nothing to prevent us from
bringing space and time down to this elementary level; but then space and
time themselves will acquire a discrete character.”16 Physicist and
mathematician James Jeans attributes the break down of causality in the
quantum world to its discrete nature: “As discontinuity [discreteness]
marched into the world of phenomena through one door, causality walked
out through another.”17 As we shall see later, the greatest difficulty in
constructing the final theories of physics, like the quantum theory of
gravity and the Theory of Everything, is in fact ‘quantization' at the Planck
magnitudes. This involves the quantization of gravity -- that is, rendering
gravity discrete. This in turn has to do with quantizing space-time
curvature since according to the general theory of relativity, gravity is
nothing but space-time warpage in the presence of mass/energy. Similarly,
space-time would have to be ‘quantized' also in the Theory of Everything.
Cambridge Astrophysicist John Gribbin states: “That [Theory of
Everything] implies that spacetime itself must be, on an appropriate very
short-range level, quantised into discrete lumps, not smoothly
continuous.”18 In order to refer to the extremely discrete character of space-
time at the Planck scales, Princeton physicist John Wheeler uses the phrase
‘space-time foam.'19

     Niels Bohr proposed that possible energy levels of atoms are
‘quantized,' that is, they are fixed and discrete. He assumed that an electron
has certain sets of possible, discrete orbits; and that it jumps from one orbit
to another without continuously crossing intervening space. An electron
cannot gain or lose energy in a continuous way, spiralling to higher or
lower orbits; it takes in, or throws off, packets (quanta) of energy and leaps
from one orbit to another like a rabbit disappearing and reappearing
discontinuously. For instance, in hydrogen atom which has one electron in
orbit, if a quantum packet of light energy - a photon -- is absorbed, the
electron jumps to a higher orbit. Whether it jumps to the next orbit or six
orbits farther depends on how large quantum of energy it takes in. If the
electron is in an outer orbit and emits (gives off) a quantum of energy, it
leaps discontinuously (like a magical rabbit) down to a lower orbit. In
either direction, the electron can only occupy fixed, discrete orbits, nothing
in between.

      As we wind up our discussions on the two fundamental postulates of
modern physics -- the continuum and the quantum -- we refer to some
interesting comparisons and contrasts between these concepts and other
notions related to them. Thus, the continuum implies some important
themes of classical physics, like causal determinism and locality. This
means that what is continuous is characterized by determinism and locality,
and vice versa. We can make similar statements about determinism and
locality too. What is deterministic has the character of the continuum, and
also has the property of locality.20 Similarly, the concept of discreteness
also entails some important notions of quantum physics, such as
indeterminism and non-locality. Each of these notions is correlated with
each other. What is discrete is thus indeterminate and non-local. We can
make similar statements also about indeterminism and non-locality. What
is indeterminate is discrete and non-local. Interestingly, each of these
characteristics of classical physics contrasts with its correlated, opposite
property of quantum mechanics. Hence, we have the opposing pairs of
continuity versus discontinuity, determinism versus indeterminism, and
locality versus non-locality. Bohm contrasts the concept of continuity and
its related notions in the theory of relativity with the postulate of
discreteness and its cognate ideas in quantum physics: “For relativity [and
also Newton's physics] requires strict continuity, strict determinism, and
strict locality, in the formulation of its laws, while quantum theory requires
discontinuity, indeterminism and non-locality in such formulations.”21

     We conclude our narrative on the continuum and the quantum with a
perceptive quote from Hooker on the impact of quantum theory on the
logical structure of classical physics:
       The logical structure of classical descriptions permitted,
       indeed demanded for completeness, the simultaneous
       application of all of the classical categories of description,
       thus: mass, charge, position, time, velocity, acceleration,
       momentum, angular momentum, energy, and so on. . . .

       In its fundamental aspect, then, quantum theory presents itself
       as demanding a weakening of the logical structure of physical
       descriptions. It imposes restrictions on the joint applicability
       of classical descriptive categories. The maximally informative,
       consistent descriptions of quantum theory pertaining to a
       single situation are logically weaker than those of classical
       theory, since they contain fewer components. The tightly
       woven logical structure of classical descriptions -- tightly
       woven because all physical descriptive categories are
       demanded simultaneously for a complete description -- is rent
       apart, as it were, as a (conceptual) consequence of the
       discovery of the (physical) quantum of action, to form a more
       weakly connected descriptive framework in which only some
       of the possible physical descriptive categories are applicable at
       any one time.22

Indeed, ‘the tightly woven logical structure of the descriptions of classical
physics,' demanding ‘for completeness the simultaneous application of all
of the classical categories of description,' is the outcome of the
foundational concept of the continuum. By contrast, the weakening of this
logical structure of physical descriptions in quantum mechanics, imposing
‘restrictions on the joint applicability of classical descriptive categories,' is
the ‘consequence of the discovery of the (physical) quantum of action,' --
of the overarching concept of discreteness.

2.1.2. The Quantum Itself

     As we have seen,23 it was Max Planck, one of the founders of quantum
mechanics, who proposed the concept of the quantum – of discreteness of
energy - in the year 1900. Before Planck's time, physicists thought of
nature as a continuum.24 They believed that various physical quantities, like
energy, mass and momentum, and also space and time, were continuous and
smooth. However, James Maxwell's assumption in his theory of
electromagnetism that energy comes only in continuous quantities led to
serious conceptual problems that rocked the foundations of classical
physics in the last decade of the nineteenth century. The basic idea of
Planck's quantum hypothesis is that this continuous view of the world must
be replaced by a discrete one. Planck's work thus broke with the concept of
the continuum in nature. De Broglie comments on the great significance of
Planck's momentous discovery:

       It is probable, that at the time when Planck wrote his
       fundamental papers on the theory of black body radiation,
       contemporary physicists did not at once comprehend the
       importance of the revolution which had just been
       accomplished. The hypothesis of Planck without doubt must
       have seemed to them an ingenious means of improving the
       theory of an interesting but, all in all, a particular phenomenon,
       and not a brilliant idea destined to upset all the classical
       conceptions of physics. But, little by little, the fundamental
       importance of the idea of Planck became apparent. The
       theorists perceived that the discontinuity introduced by the
       hypothesis of quanta is incompatible with the general ideas
       which served up to then as the bases of physics and demanded
       a complete revision of these ideas. We can not admire too
       much the intuition of genius which permitted Planck, by the
       study of a particular physical fact, to perceive at a glance one
       of the most fundamental and mysterious laws of nature. More
       than forty years [now more than a century] have passed since
       this marvelous discovery and we are still far from having
       achieved a comprehension of all its import, and exhausting all
       its consequences. In the history of the progress of the human
       mind, the conquest of the constant of Planck must remain a
       memorable date.25
     In effect, Planck discovered that the basic structure of physical reality
is discrete, granular or discontinuous. He replaced the concept of
continuous amount energy with the idea of ‘packet' or ‘bundle' of energy
which he called ‘quantum;' its definition involves a universal constant, now
called ‘Planck's constant.' The idea that such a constant existed, or that
quanta were real, was so ‘unorthodox' that when it was first proposed, not
even Planck himself could make this leap of faith. However, confirming
evidence gradually accumulated, and by the year 1913, the ‘quantum
heresy' was generally accepted: indeed, quanta - discrete units of energy --
were deemed to be real.

     Planck arrived at the concept of the discreteness of energy as he was
attempting to solve a simple problem: he wanted to know how objects glow
brighter as they get hotter, and change colour when their temperature is
increased or decreased. Classical physics had no proper explanation for this
commonplace occurrence. In order to arrive at a solution to this problem,
Planck decided to examine the phenomenon of ‘black body radiation.' It
was Gustav Kirchoff who in 1859 suggested black body as a medium for
studying the behaviour of light and electromagnetic phenomena. We see an
object when light that has fallen on it, is reflected by its surface and
reaches our eyes. However, not all light falling on an object is reflected;
much of it is absorbed by the object itself. For instance, a red rose flower
appears red because it reflects only red light. White light falling on red rose
contains all colours of the spectrum; red colour is reflected, and the
remaining colours are absorbed. Moreover, the nature of light reflected
from an object, such as red light reflected from rose flower, depends also
on the properties of reflecting surface, like its roughness, smoothness,
temperature and so on.

     Kirchoff suggested that the way out of these problems was to define an
ideal body which absorbs all light falling upon it and reflects none of it
back. He called such an object a ‘black body.' “Black body radiation is the
radiation that comes from a nonreflecting, perfectly absorbing, flat
(nonglossy) black body.”26 By investigating black bodies, Kirchoff
assumed, physicists would be able to examine the radiation which is
naturally emitted by them, and which depends only on their temperature;
they can examine black bodies without bothering about problems arising
from the properties of reflecting surface. Since black is the absence of
colour (no light is reflected or emitted), black bodies have no colour unless
we heat them. If a black body is glowing a certain colour, we know that it is
because of the energy that we have added to it, and not because it reflects
or emits that colour spontaneously. As a body is heated, the radiation it
emits becomes increasingly of shorter wavelength until the body becomes
visible and successively glows red, yellow, blue and finally white.27

     Before the year 1900, physicists assumed that electrons of excited
atoms from a metallic surface radiate energy continuously and smoothly
until their energy is exhausted and dissipated. But Planck discovered that
they emit energy only in specific quantities. Instead of radiating energy
continuously and smoothly as a clock spring runs down, atoms give off
their energy in spurts, dropping to lower energy levels after each spurt until
they stop emitting energy altogether. Planck's investigations of black body
radiation led to the revolutionary theory that light and electromagnetic
radiation are emitted in discrete, separate units or ‘packets' of energy, not
continuously and smoothly, like a continuous, unbroken wave, as classical
physics claimed. He postulated that energy is given off in discrete
quantities -- in whole number(s). A radiating body gives off one, two, three
or any number of units of energy. But this number is never fractional, such
as one and a half, or one and a quarter; that is to say, when it comes to
energy, no fractions are allowed. Planck called each discrete unit or packet
of energy a ‘quantum.' He specified the amount of discreteness of energy --
the size of a single quantum by the symbol ‘h’ (pronounced ‘h-bar') which
was later called ‘Planck's constant.' It is the fundamental parameter in
quantum mechanics, and it determines the size of discrete units of energy.
Planck's constant is an extremely small unit, and if it were set to zero, then
the nature of the world would appear continuous. 28

     Furthermore, Planck discovered a proportion between the energy of a
light particle (photon) and its frequency. We know that the higher the
frequency of a light wave is, the shorter its wavelength; and the lower its
frequency, the longer its wavelength. Hence, high-frequency light like
violet has short wavelength and low-frequency light like red has long
wavelength. Planck found that there is a relation between light energy and
frequency: the higher the frequency is (shorter wavelength), the higher the
energy, and the lower the frequency is (longer wavelength), the lower the
energy. Hence, the energy of a light particle is directly proportional to its
frequency, and inversely proportional to its wavelength. Consequently,
high-frequency light, like violet light has short wavelength and high
energy; and low-frequency light, like red light, has long wavelength and
low energy. This means that long wavelength radiation is intrinsically less
energetic than short wavelength radiation.29 De Broglie formulates Planck's
postulate: “Matter can emit radiant energy only in finite quantities
proportional to the frequency.”30 This simple relation between energy and
frequency is central to quantum mechanics.

     Planck's quantum hypothesis explains this relation between energy and
frequency. He found that high and low frequencies of light comprise
varying sizes of energy ‘packets.' But each packet of each colour
(frequency) has the same amount of energy. Accordingly, each packet of red
light has the same amount of energy, each packet of green light has the
same quantity of energy, and each packet of violet light has the same
amount of energy. However, energy packets of different colours have
different amounts of energy. Thus, the energy packets of violet light are
‘larger' than those of green light, and the energy packets of green light are
‘larger' than those of red light. In other words, the size of energy packets of
low-frequency light (longer wavelength) like red is ‘smaller' than those of
high-frequency light (shorter wavelength) like violet.31 This explains why
hot objects radiate energy as they do. When a black body is slowly heated,
the first colour it glows is red because the energy packets of red light are
the smallest in the visible spectrum of light. As the heat is increased, more
energy is available and bigger energy packets produce higher-frequency
colours, such as blue and violet. With ever increasing size of these packets
of energy appear colours of higher frequencies.32 This is indeed the solution
to the problem Planck set out to unravel: how objects glow brighter as they
get hotter, and change colour when their temperature is increased or
decreased.
     The following figure exhibits the whole spectrum of electromagnetic
radiation which extends from gamma rays with shortest wavelength of one
millionth of a nanometer to radio waves many kilometers long. X-rays
range from 0.01 to 10 nanometers in wavelength. Visible light has
wavelengths extending from four hundred to seven hundred nanometers.




             Figure 3. The electromagnetic spectrum
    (Courtesy: Paul Davies, The Goldilocks Enigma). ‘nm' stands for
nanometer which is 10-9 of a meter. ‘pm' refers to micrometer which is 10-6
                               of a meter.

     The foregoing discussions show that wavelength, frequency and
energy are all related terms. Hopefully the following explanations further
clarify these relationships and proportions. Wavelength is the distance
between successive crests or successive troughs of waves.33 Closer crests
and closer troughs in a wave mean shorter wavelength, and distant crests
and distant troughs imply longer wavelength. (See Figures 3 and 4)




     Figure 4. Low frequency (low energy) light with long
                         wavelength




    Figure 5. High frequency (high energy) light with short
                         wavelength
     Frequency in general means how often something happens. The
frequency of a wave refers to the number of up-and-down cycles of
oscillation that a wave completes every second. (See Figures 3 and 4) The
concepts of wavelength, frequency and energy are intimately related. The
longer the wavelength is, the lower the frequency; and the shorter the
wavelength is, the higher the frequency. Thus, the relation between
wavelength and frequency is one of inverse proportion. Again, the longer
the wavelength, lesser the energy, and shorter the wavelength, higher the
energy; here again, there is an inverse proportion between wavelength and
energy. Finally, there is a direct proportion between frequency and energy:
higher frequency means higher energy, and the lower frequency, the lower
energy.34 (See Figures 3 and 4)

      The relationships between wavelength, frequency and energy can be
illustrated by the following example. Take a long rope, tie its one end on a
pillar, and hold the other end in one's hand. To generate a long wavelength,
we leisurely shake our end of the rope up and down. The frequency of
waves matches the number of cycles per second, which our arm goes up
and down; and it is fairly low. We need not expend much energy to
accomplish this feat; it is a low energy affair. Here we execute an operation
which involves long wavelength, less frequency and low energy. In order to
produce short wavelengths of the rope, we have to shake it more frequently,
and this yields higher-frequency waves of the rope. For this, we have to
exert more - higher - energy, and the rope too gets more energy. Here we
perform an act which entails short wavelength, higher frequency and higher
energy. The term ‘amplitude' is also used in relation to waves; it describes
the maximum height or depth of a wave. In fact, there is a proportion
between energy and amplitude of a wave: the lower the amplitude, the
lower the energy, and higher the amplitude, the higher the energy. More
specifically, the energy transported by a wave is directly proportional to the
square of its amplitude.

     As we close our narrative on the quantum, we observe that Planck's
monumental discovery of the discreteness of energy put an end to the
classical concept of the continuum in nature. Literally, the quantum has
‘pulverized' (reduced to dust or grains) the continuum.35 We conclude with
Pagels' comment on Planck's discovery of the quantum:

       Then with an incredible leap of intuition, Planck made the
       quantum hypothesis, which in his own words he described as
       ‘an act of sheer desperation.' . . . Energy exchange was not
       continuous but discrete. Completely without precedent, this
       idea was one of the great leaps of the rational imagination, and
       Planck spent the remainder of his long life attempting to
       reconcile his radiation law with the continuous picture of
       nature.36
2.2. The Quantum ‘Wavicles'

      The quantum world is essentially characterized by discreteness, we
said. The most important ‘ingredients' of this world are quantum ‘stuff'
(wave-particle) and quantum interactions (Heisenberg's uncertainty
relation). These follow from the fundamental concept of discreteness. We
start our narrative with the quantum ‘stuff' which is sometimes dubbed
‘wavicle' (wave-particle). Quantum objects, like photons and electrons,
possess complementary properties of both wave and particle. The double-
slit experiment demonstrates their wave-like property and photoelectric
effect confirms their particlelike character.

2.2.1. The Quantum Wave

     Quantum mechanics appeared on the modern scientific horizon with
Thomas Young's double-slit experiment in the year 1801. In a sense, it is
the foundational experiment in quantum physics. “[Richard] Feynman was
fond of saying that all of quantum mechanics can be gleaned from carefully
thinking through the implications of this single experiment, so it's well
worth discussing.”37 In fact, the double-slit experiment accomplished a
paradigm shift in the conception of quantum objects. Classical physicists
including Newton believed that light is a stream of particles. That belief
was completely overturned by this experiment which demonstrated that
light is also a wave.

     The double-slit experiment can be best understood by comparing it
with ‘single-slit' experiment.38 Greene says: “The [double-slit] experiment
consists of comparing the images on photographic plates that result when
either or both of the slits in the barrier are kept open and the light source is
turned on.”39 For both single-slit and double-slit experiments, the
arrangements are the same except that for single-slit experiments, one of
the slits (left or right) is open, and the other slit (right or left) is kept
closed; the experimental setting consists of a light source like a flashlight,
a barrier screen with two slits and an image screen, like a photographic
plate for recording the arrival of light particles or photons.40 In single-slit
experiments, either left or right slit is covered, leaving right or left slit
open. If the left slit is closed and the right slit is open, then the image will
be impressed on the image screen against the right slit like the one shown
in figure 6. Alternately, if the right slit is covered and the left slit is open,
the image will be found on the screen against the left silt like the one in
figure 7.




       Figure 6. Single-slit experiment with right slit open




                 >

        Figure 7. Single-slit experiment with left slit open
In both cases, since light passes through either the right or the left slit only,
its image will be impressed only either on the right or the left part of the
image screen.

     However, in double-slit experiment, the light beam passes through
both slits and its image is recorded on the image screen. According to
classical physics, since both slits are open, the number of photons passing
through them would be more than those passing through single-slit, thereby
exposing the photographic plate to more total light than in single-slit
experiments. Further, in the Newtonian view because light consists of
corpuscles (little pellets), the particles that pass through two slits would be
impressed on the screen against two areas that line up with two slits. That
is to say, the images would be found against both slits. The image on the
photographic plate would appear like the one in figure 8 which is a
combination of figures 6 and 7.




      Figure 8. The double-slit experiment (classical view)




    Figure 9. The double-slit experiment (with interference
                           pattern)
But the actual image we observe on the screen is something entirely
different and quite amazing too. We find that if both slits are open, the
stream of light produces alternate bands of bright and dark images on the
photographic plate. (See Figure 9) Such a sequence of bright and dark
bands is known as ‘interference pattern' which is typical of wave
phenomena. In bright areas of the image screen, light-wave peaks from
each slit coincide; that is, crests from two beams meet and they enhance
each other, producing bright bands. Whereas in dark areas, light-wave
peaks from one slit coincide with wave troughs from the other, resulting in
cancellation; that is to say, where crests from one light-wave coincide with
troughs from the other, they would cancel out producing dark bands. In
fact, such interference patterns occur in any wave system when two or more
waves come together and overlap: a crest adds with another crest to make a
larger crest, but as a crest meets a trough, they cancel each other.41 Wave
phenomena are thus characterized by such interference patterns.

     As we saw, in single-slit experiments, photons produce images on the
photographic plate, lined up against right or left slit that is open as in the
case of images in figure 6 or 7. However, in doubleslit experiment with
both slits open, we observe an interference pattern -- dark and bright bands
alternating. That is, areas on the photographic plate, which were dark in
single-slit experiments, are now bright in double-slit experiment; and vice
versa, bright areas in single-slit experiments are now dark in double-slit
experiment as in figure 9. Greene describes this puzzling scenario of
interference patterns in detail:

       But when you later examine the image produced [in doubleslit
       experiment], you find that not only are there places on the
       photographic plate that were dark in the first [single-slit]
       experiment and are now bright, as expected, there are also
       places on the photographic plate that were bright in your first
       [single-slit] experiment, but are now dark as in Figure 4.8 [in
       the present text 9]. By increasing the number of individual
       photons that hit the photographic plate, you have decreased the
       brightness in certain areas. Somehow, temporally separated,
       individual, particulate photons are able to cancel each other
       out. Think about how crazy this is. Photons that would have
       passed through the right slit and hit the film [photographic
       plate] in one of the dark bands in Figure 4.8 [in text 9] fail to
       do so when the left slit is opened (which is why the band is now
       dark). But how in the world can a tiny bundle of light that
       passes through one slit be at all affected by whether or not the
       other slit is open?42

Zukav gives an alternate description of the same scenario ending it up with
an almost similar question:

       If both slits are open, there are always alternating bands of
       illuminated and dark areas. This means that there are always
       areas where the photons never go (otherwise there would not be
       any dark areas). If one of the slits is closed, there is no
       interference and the dark bands disappear; the whole wall
       [image screen] becomes illuminated, including those areas
       which previously were dark when both slits were open.

          When we fired our photon and it went through the first slit,
       how did it ‘know' that it could go to an area that must be dark
       if the other slit were open? In other words, how did the photon
       know that the other slit was closed? 43

Indeed, the behaviour of light in double-slit experiment is strange and
astonishing.

     We can observe similar bizarre behaviour of photons in doubleslit
experiment even if we weaken or reduce the intensity of the light beam
until only one photon at a time passes through the slits; and the image
screen records the cumulative effect of many photons arriving one after
another at the screen for a period of time. According to classical physics,
the individual photon would travel through either one slit or the other.
Because the photons are fired individually, there would not be any
interference of waves, and so no wave pattern either. Individual photons
arrive at the image screen one by one and leave their mark. Hence, if we
examine the screen after a number of photons have arrived, according to
classical theory, we should find two images aligned with the two slits.
These images would be like those in figure 8. However, when we actually
observe the image screen, we do not find such a distribution of marks of
photons impressed on the screen; rather we find a wave pattern just as if a
strong stream of photons is fired all at once as in figure 9.

      In other words, if individual photons are fired at the two slits one at a
time and their point of arrival at the image screen is recorded, one observes
the bright and dark interference patterns identical with patterns of the
original double-slit experiment with a strong stream of photons. Stephen
Hawking comments referring to electrons: “Each electron, therefore, must
be passing through both slits at the same time!”44 Similarly, John
Polkinghorne opines: “Since the appearance of the fringes depends
critically upon both slits in the screen being open, one is driven to the
(classically unintelligible) conclusion that the electron ‘went through both
slits'.”45 Greene asks: “How can individual photon particles that
sequentially pass through the screen and separately hit the photographic
plate conspire to produce the bright and dark bands of interfering waves?”46
According to the classical view, each photon passes through either the left
slit or the right slit, and we would therefore find the pattern shown in figure
8. But we do not. The paradox here is that any photon can surely pass
through only one of the slits. Yet the interference pattern requires two
overlapping wave fronts, one from each slit. Since the interference pattern
depends critically upon both slits in the screen being open, one is forced to
conclude that each photon must have passed through both slits at the same
time!

      In the modern version of double-slit experiment, carried out by
Japanese researchers at the end of 1980s, a source of electrons like electron
gun replaces the source of light, magnetic fields plays the role double-slit,
and a detector similar to the screen in a television set functions as screen.
The remarkable thing is that in such an experiment with electrons, one gets
exactly the same kind of interference patterns as those obtained from
experiment with light as source. In the modified version of the experiment,
single electrons are fired through the double-slit system, and their image
impressed on the sensitive surface of a television screen. As more and more
electrons pass through the double-slit system, their impressions on the
screen add up to make a distinctive pattern of light and shade. It is exactly
the interference pattern associated with a strong stream of electrons that
passes through both slits at once en route to the screen. Thus, even when
electrons are fired one at a time, the interference patterns still appear just
as in the case of experiment with shooting photons one by one. But the
cumulative effect of enormous number of electrons will average out the
distribution into a well-defined pattern. This interference pattern is the
same as the one obtained with a strong source of electrons.47

     An alternative description of the flight of a particle, like a photon or
an electron from the source to the image screen is given in terms of
Richard Feynman's path integral formalism. Feynman argues that in
travelling from the source to a given point on the image screen, each
individual photon or electron actually traverses every possible trajectory
simultaneously. The electron tries out every possible path - an infinite
number of them -- between the source and a given position on the screen. It
may travel in an orderly way through left slit; simultaneously it may also
pass through right slit. It may head towards left slit, but may suddenly
change course and move through right slit. The electron may roam back
and forth, and finally pass through left slit. It may even undertake a long
journey to the Andromeda galaxy before turning back and passing through
right slit on its way to the screen! According to Feynman, the electron
simultaneously ‘sniffs' out every possible path from the source to the
screen. In the following figure, a few of the infinity of trajectories of a
single electron travelling from the source to the screen are shown. Notice
that the electron actually goes through both slits.48




Figure 10. A Feynman diagram of an electron trying different
                          paths
    The bizarre behaviour of photons/electrons in double-slit experiment
does raise a number of puzzling questions. Gribbin points out some of the
conundrums:

       It is as if each electron leaves the gun as a particle, turns into a
       wave that travels both ways through the apparatus, then turns
       back into a particle to arrive at a definite spot on the screen.
       Not only that, but it chooses exactly the right spot to make its
       overall contribution to an interference pattern that is built up
       over a long period of time.49

There are still more questions about the strange behaviour of
photons/electrons in the double-slit experiment. How does each individual
particle ‘know' where the others preceding it have hit on the image screen,
and where those following it will land so that it can place itself at the right
location in the interference pattern that builds up from the flow of
thousands or even millions of particles in the experiment? How does a
photon/electron which passes only through one of the slits, ‘know' of the
existence of the other slit and adjust its behaviour accordingly? Could it be
that it passes through both the slits at the same time, only to collapse into a
particle when it arrives on the screen contributing to the interference
pattern?

      Then there is the all-important problem about the nature of the photon/
electron wave itself. Eminent quantum physicists de Broglie and
Schrödinger held that these are ‘matter waves' just as ocean waves are
water waves. According to them, all quantum objects, not just electrons, are
little waves, and all of nature is a great wave phenomenon. Schrödinger
held that electron waves were ‘smeared-out' electrons. This captured some
‘feeling' of an electron wave, but it was too inelegant. When we smear
something out, part of it is here and part of it is there. However, one never
encounters half of an electron or a third of it, or any other fraction, for that
matter. This makes it hard to grasp what a smeared electron actually is. As
an alternative, in 1926 Max Born refined Schrödinger's concept of electron
wave, and it is his interpretation, developed by Bohr and his colleagues,
that is still accepted today. Born held that quantum waves are not material,
but waves of probability. Thus, electron is not a wave like a water wave; it
is not a matter wave, but a probability wave. Physicist Fritjof Capra
explains: “They [quantum particles] are not ‘real' three-dimensional waves
like sound or water waves. They are ‘probability waves,' abstract
mathematical quantities with all the characteristic properties of waves
which are related to the probabilities of finding the particles at particular
points in space and at particular times.”50 Likewise, Pagels says: “What is
behaving like a wave is the probability amplitude for finding electrons —
waves of probability! Although the electron is a particle, the distribution of
these particles on the screen imitates that of a water wave -completely
different from the bullets.”51
     For example, consider the waves of an ocean. If two wave crests
overlap, the height of water wave at that point increases; the amplitudes or
heights of waves add up to produce the total height. But if one wave crest
meets a wave trough at one point, the two waves cancel each other out. This
principle of adding individual wave amplitudes to get the total is called the
‘superposition principle.' Like ordinary waves, the probability waves of
quantum objects obey superposition principle; if there are two probability
waves in some region of space, the amplitudes of these waves add up to
give the total height. But there is a difference: simple addition of
probabilities is not valid in quantum mechanics. Pagels explains: “The
probability for finding a particle at a point in space is not given by the
height of the wave at that point but rather by the intensity of the wave —
the height of the wave squared, gotten by multiplying the height at that
point times itself.”52 Pagels further tells us:

       Because the wave amplitudes add by the superposition
       principle but the probability for finding a particle is given by
       the square of the wave amplitude — its intensity — probability
       in quantum theory are not additive, and there results a
       nonlinear aspect to quantum probabilities, unlike those
       encountered in classical physics.53

Greene expresses the same concept of probability differently: “Places
where the magnitude (a bit more correctly, the square of magnitude) of the
wave is large are places where the electron is more likely to be found;
places where the magnitude is small are places where the electron is less
likely to be found.”54 (See Figure 11)
          Figure 11. Probabilities of finding an electron
Thus, if the probability wave or more precisely, the square of the
probability wave of an electron is twice as large at location A than at
location B, then quantum theory predicts that in a sequence of many
repetitions of an experiment, the electron will be found at location A twice
as often as at location B. The ‘shape' and evolution of such probability
waves are governed by Schrödinger equation.

    We conclude our discourse on ‘The quantum wave' with a quote from
Coveney and Highfield:

       To the extent that quantum mechanics provides the ultimate
       description, no more can be asked about the whereabouts of the
       electron until it impinges on the screen. We are therefore
       forced to conclude that the electron is somehow spread or
       delocalised throughout space and time, passing through both
       slits and interfering with itself before miraculously collapsing
       instantaneously to some spot on the screen in an entirely
       random fashion. It is everywhere and nowhere at the same
       time.55

2.2.2. The Quantum Particle

     The double-slit experiment conclusively proves that light behaves as a
wave. This outcome is in fact surprising because traditionally it was held
by physicists including Newton that light consists of particles. Of course,
we may say that in the double-slit experiment, a photon or an electron
behaves, not only as a wave, but also as a particle; that is, a photon
proceeds as a particle from a light source, spreads out as a wave, and
finally ends up as a particle to design the interference pattern of a wave on
the image screen. However, this is not a definitive proof that light consists
of particles. In order to produce such a proof, a genius like Einstein had to
enter the scene. He started with Planck's concept of the discreteness of
energy. Planck believed that light displays its discrete nature only when it
is being emitted by some physical object. “This meant that when light is
moving in free space it is not quantized but rather retains the wave
characteristics described by Maxwell's equations.”56 Einstein believed that
Planck's revolution was not radical enough. He assumed that light is
quantized, and so it is emitted or absorbed as particles. It is the
phenomenon of photoelectric effect that led him to this insight. Einstein
extended Planck's hypothesis regarding the nature of light, and suggested
that light itself consists of particles. Science writer Gary Zukav says:
“Einstein's theory of light was that it is composed of tiny particles. A beam
of light, said Einstein, is analogous to a stream of bullets. Each bullet is
called a photon. This is similar to what Planck proposed, but actually it is a
leap beyond. . . . Einstein theorized that energy itself is quantized.”57
Greene makes an interesting comment about Einstein's discovery of the
particlenature of light: “But Einstein, the man who brought down Newton's
revered theory of gravity, seems now to have resurrected Newton's particle
model of light by his introduction of photons.”58

     In order to prove his theory, Einstein investigated the phenomenon of
photoelectric effect; and in 1905 he wrote a paper demonstrating the
particle nature of light.59 Employing Planck's concept of the discreteness of
energy, Einstein made the ingenious proposal that in photoelectric effect,
light behaves as if it is made up of individual particles or little packets,
each packet carrying a definite amount of energy. The photoelectric effect
was discovered by the German physicist Heinrich Hertz in 1887. “This
phenomenon consists in this: that a piece of metal, exposed to the action of
radiation with a sufficiently short wavelength, often expels electrons in
rapid motion.”60 When a beam of light strikes a metallic surface, it
relinquishes some of its energy. This transferred energy excites electrons in
the metal, and some of the loosely bound electrons are knocked off the
surface. When a dim beam of light shines on the surface of a metal, the
beam ejects electrons from the metal, one at a time precisely as though
individual particles of light (individual photons) were hitting electrons and
knocking them out of the metal's surface one by one. This becomes
possible because some of the electrons of metals are only loosely bound
within their atoms. They are not tightly bound to any individual atom and
so are relatively free to move around the metal. Light falling on a piece of
metal provides energy for these free electrons, and if they get sufficient
energy, they move fast enough to fly off. This phenomenon is known as
photoelectric effect which works because metals have a lot of loose
electrons. (See Figure 12) In itself, there is nothing particularly remarkable
about this phenomenon.61




                 Figure 12. The Photoelectric effect
     However, the strange features of photoelectric effect become apparent
when one examines in detail the properties of electrons ejected from a
piece of metal as light rays fall on it. Philippe Lenard observed two
peculiar characteristics.62 First, if the energy or frequency (colour) of the
impinging light is kept constant and its intensity is increased (that is, a
stronger light is used; Lenard simply moved his light source closer to the
metal), then the number of ejected electrons increased, but their speed
remained the same. Second, if the frequency, and so the energy, of
impinging light (that is, when light with a shorter wavelength or different
colour is used), is increased, then the speed of ejected electrons also
increases; and equivalently, if the frequency of light is decreased, their
speed also decreases. Greene comments: “For some unknown reason, the
color [frequency] of the impinging light beam — not its total energy
[intensity] — controls whether or not electrons are ejected, and if they are,
the energy they have.”63 De Broglie describes the photoelectric puzzle as
follows:

       The essential characteristic of this phenomenon is that the
       energy of the expelled electrons is solely a function of the
       frequency of the incident radiation and does not depend in any
       way on its intensity. Only the number of the electrons depends
       on the incident intensity. These simple empiric laws made most
       difficult the theoretical interpretation of the elementary
       mechanism at the base of the liberation of the photoelectric
       electrons, or photoelectrons, as they are called today.64

     Einstein based his revolutionary theory on the experimental work of
Lenard. He set out to find solutions to the riddles posed by photoelectric
effect by broadening Planck's concept of discreteness of energy. Zukav
explains in detail:

       Einstein's theory also substantiated Planck's revolutionary
       discovery. High-frequency light, like violet, is made of higher-
       energy photons than low-frequency light, like red. Therefore,
       when violet light, which is made of high-energy photons,
       strikes an electron, it causes the electron to rebound with a
       high velocity. When red light, which is made of low-energy
       photons, strikes an electron, it causes the electron to rebound at
       a low velocity. In either case, increasing or decreasing the
       intensity of the light increases or decreases the number of
       rebounding electrons, but only by changing the color
       [frequency] of the impinging light can we change their
       velocity.

       In short, Einstein demonstrated, using the photoelectric effect,
       that light is made of particles, or photons, and that the photons
       of high-frequency light have more energy than the photons of
       low-frequency light.65

     Thus, basing himself on Lenard's observations on photoelectric effect,
Einstein suggested that Planck's concept of the discreteness of energy
emission can be incorporated into a new description of light as consisting
of particles. As we saw, high-frequency light such as violet light has short
wavelength and high energy, and low-frequency light like red light has long
wavelength and low energy.66 Hence, photons of violet light knock off
electrons from atoms of a metal and send them flying off at a higher speed
than photons of red light because photons of violet light with high-
frequency have more energy than photons of red light with low-frequency.

      Consequently, what determines the energy and speed of ejected
electrons is the frequency (colour) of light beam. This means that if we
increase the frequency (colour) of impinging light (for instance, using
violet light), then electrons will leave metallic surface with greater speed;
but if the frequency of light is decreased (red light is used), then electrons
will be ejected at slower speed. The reason is that the energy packets of
violet light are ‘larger' than those of red light. Thus, violet light has more
energy (high frequency and shorter wavelength) than red light (low
frequency and longer wavelength). This follows from Planck's principle
that the energy of each photon is proportional to its frequency. However, as
the intensity of light of any frequency is increased, the number of photons
impinging on metallic surface increases resulting in an increase in the
number of ejected electrons. Conversely, if the intensity of light is reduced,
the number of photons falling on metal is also decreased, as also the
number of ejected electrons. For instance, reducing the intensity of a beam
of green light decreases the number of photons in the beam. Each
remaining photon, however, still has the same amount of energy as any
other photon of green light. Consequently, when a photon of green light
strikes an electron, it knocks it away with the amount of energy which is
characteristic of green-light photons. But since the intensity of light beam
is reduced, the number of ejected electrons is also decreased. Hence, a light
beam, according to Einstein, should actually be thought of as a stream of
tiny packets — tiny particles of light with definite amount of energy.67 In
the words of Greene:

       The frequency of the light (its color) determines the speed of
       the ejected electrons; the total intensity of the light determines
       the number of ejected electrons. And so Einstein showed that
       Planck's hypothesis of the discrete nature of energy actually
       reflects a fundamental feature of electromagnetic waves: They
       are composed of particles — photons — that are little bundles,
       or quanta of light.68

     Evidently, Einstein's hypothesis accounted for the peculiarities of
photoelectric effect which Lenard observed. We sum up Einstein's
contribution to quantum physics in the words of Glen Kezwer : “He
[Einstein] extended Planck's quantum hypothesis by suggesting that the
light itself is quantized, meaning that the light behaves as if it consists of
individual particles or quanta each of which carries a definite amount of
energy.”69

2.2.3. The Wave-Particle Complementarity

     Thomas Young's double-slit experiment demonstrated that light is
wave-like, and Einstein's interpretation of photoelectric effect, established
that light is particle-like. In some contexts, light behaves as wave and in
others as particle. The double-slit experiment shows that light manifests
the interference properties of waves. The photoelectric effect confirms that
light has particle-like properties. Greene says: “Together they show that
light has both wave-like and particle-like properties. The microscopic
world demands that we shed our intuition that something is either a wave or
a particle and embrace the possibility that it is both.”70 But no single
experiment shows light to be both, and none could, since waves and
particles have mutually exclusive properties. Under no circumstances, it
behaves as both wave and particle. The property of being wave-like, as the
property of being particle-like, is relative to circumstances of
measurement. The complex nature of light can be summarized as follows:
       The description of light must be in terms of incompatible
       properties that cannot be observed together at the same time
       but that together give a complete model of the behavior of
       light. The properties of being a wave and being a particle are
       mutually incompatible, yet the complete description of the
       nature of light must include both. The two properties
       complement each other.71 Because of the wave-like and
       particle-like nature of quantum particles, like photons and
       electrons, they are sometimes called ‘wavicles.'

      However, the concepts of wave and particle are fundamentally
different. They have a number of irreconcilable differences. Particles have
some properties that are contrary to those of waves. Likewise, waves
behave in some ways that particles simply do not and cannot. Particles are
discrete objects, confined to relatively small, well-defined locations in
space and time. They interact with one another, for example, by bouncing
off one another. Waves, on the other hand, are typically spread out over
fairly wide areas. They interact with one another in ways quite different
from those of particles. They are easily split in an enormous variety of
ways, some parts moving in one direction, and some in other directions.
Two waves sometimes interact with one another so as to form a larger
wave; sometimes two waves interact in such a way as to cancel each other
out. These behaviour patterns of waves, we saw, are known as
‘interference.'72

      These general properties of particle and wave are exemplified in the
classical concept of particle and in the quantum mechanical notion of wave.
Classically, a particle is characterized by a sharp spatial position, and if it
is moving, it has a definite trajectory through space in time. It has
momentum and energy, and these quantities are also sharply localized in
space and time. By contrast, a quantum wave cannot be sharply localized.
The energy and momentum of a wave are distributed throughout its spatial
extension, and are also not sharply localized. It follows that a wave has no
definite trajectory through space in time, but rather propagates through a
finite spatial volume in time. Typical characteristics of wave phenomena
are interference and diffraction, none of which are associated with particle
motions. Thus, there is the greatest possible contrast between the concepts
of classical particle and quantum wave.73 Despite these dissimilarities,
however, quantum objects, such as photons, electrons and protons, exhibit
characteristics of both waves and particles.

     If quantum objects behave as waves and particles, which are
apparently contrary entities, how are we to think of their reality? To answer
this question, Niels Bohr proposed the theory of complementarity. He
interpreted wave-particle duality as complementary states of the same
quantum object. Bohr suggested that these seemingly incompatible
properties are complementary rather than contradictory. According to de
Broglie, by complementarity Bohr means that “a complete description of
observable phenomena requires that these concepts [wave and particle] be
employed in turn, but that these concepts nevertheless are in a sense
irreconcilable, the images that they furnish never being simultaneously
applicable in toto to a description of reality.”74 Though the concepts of
particle and wave exclude one another, the wave-particle nature of a photon
or an electron, for instance, can be regarded as complementary aspects of
the same reality like two sides of a coin. An electron can behave sometimes
as a wave and sometimes as a particle, but never as both together, just as a
tossed coin may fall either head or tail up, but never both at once. Wave and
particle are the complementary representations of the same quantum
object. Bohr says that “the evidence obtained under different experimental
conditions cannot be comprehended within a single picture, but must be
regarded as complementary in the sense that only the totality of the
phenomena exhausts possible information about the objects.”75 The
principle of complementarity states that quantum entities are neither pure
waves nor pure particles in their nature, but objects that partake of the
characters of both. Photon is not a wave in the classical sense; it is a wave
which is also a particle. Nor is electron a particle in the old sense; it is a
particle which is also a wave. We may therefore describe an object like an
electron in ways which are mutually exclusive — as wave or as particle —
without logical contradiction.

    However, the experimental arrangements which determine these
complementary descriptions also have to be similarly mutually exclusive.
It is purely a human choice - of the scientist -- which experiment, and so
which description s/he chooses. The role of the scientist in choosing the
experimental set up can be illustrated by modifying the original double-slit
experiment - by setting up little beams of light right behind the two holes.
We can now observe which hole an electron goes through by detecting the
light scattered by the electron as it emerges from a hole. However, the
moment we turn on little light beams, the original experimental conditions
(of the double-slit experiment) is altered and the distribution pattern of
electrons on the image screen changes. If we know exactly which hole each
electron passes through, then the distribution on the screen becomes just
like that of machine-gun bullets — a particlelike distribution. Once we
decide to experimentally check that the electron is a particle going through
the hole, it does behave like a particle passing through the hole. But
suppose we dim the light beams so that we see only a few electrons as they
go through a given hole. Then the particle distribution begins to shift over
to the wave interference pattern in a continuous way. Pagels says:
“Whatever we do, we cannot know which hole the electron passes through
and still retain the wavelike distribution pattern. Mutually exclusive
experimental arrangements -- you can have the light beam or not -give
mutually exclusive results -- the electron behaves like a particle or it does
not.”76

      Hence, whether a photon or an electron behaves as a wave or as a
particle depends entirely on the kind of experiment we perform on it. The
wave-like property or the particle-like property of a quantum object is
relative to the circumstances of measurement/ observation. In other words,
the experimental set up -- the way a photon is measured/observed --
determines in which of the two ways it appears. However, no single
experiment or measurement shows a quantum object to be both, and none
could, since waves and particles have mutually exclusive properties. This
means that it is necessary to include the whole measurement set up in the
description of a quantum object or its property. To define its property alone
without the inclusion of the measuring set up is meaningless. Paul Davies
summarizes Bohr's position on the relation between experimental
arrangements and wave-particle duality:
       Bohr recognized that it is not paradoxical for an electron to be
       both a wave and a particle because the wave-like and
       particlelike aspects are never displayed in a contradictory way
       in the same experiment. Bohr pointed out that one can
       construct an experiment to display the wave-like properties of
       a quantum object, and another to display its particle-like
       properties, but never both together. Wave and particle
       behaviour (and other incompatibilities, such as position and
       momentum) are not so much contradictory as complementary
       aspects of a single reality. Which face of the quantum object is
       presented to us depends on how we choose to interrogate it.77

     Similarly, Pagels says:

       Bohr's principle of complementarity asserts that there exist
       complementary properties of the same object of knowledge,
       one of which if known will exclude knowledge of the other. We
       may therefore describe an object like an electron in ways
       which are mutually exclusive — e.g., as wave or particle —
       without logical contradiction provided we also realize that the
       experimental arrangements that determine these descriptions
       are similarly mutually exclusive. Which experiment -- and
       hence which description one chooses -- is purely a matter of
       human choice.78

According to Bohr, complementarity is not limited to the subatomic world,
but it is a general principle that pertains to all aspects of nature, and even to
other fields of human thought. Bohr himself applied complementarity to
biology.79

     What we said about the complementarity of wave-particle duality and
about the mutually exclusive experimental set up applies also to other
conjugate properties of quantum objects. For example, the properties of
position and momentum of a subatomic particle can be given meaning only
under different experimental arrangements. Thus, the experimental set up
used to measure the position of a particle is not the same as that used to
measure its momentum. If we design our experiment to measure position,
we cannot possibly measure the momentum at the same time with
precision; in extracting information about the one, we destroy our ability to
know about the other. Hence, there are experimental situations in which the
expression ‘position of an electron' can be assigned a definite meaning, and
also other situations in which the expression ‘momentum of an electron'
can be meaningfully employed. However, there is no experimental
arrangement in which the expression ‘position and momentum of an
electron' can be given an experimental sense.

     In his doctrine of complementarity, Bohr thus provided a conceptual
interpretation of wave-particle duality and of the complementary character
of conjugate properties such as position and momentum of quantum
objects. Complementarity is thus an essential trait of the quantum world.
The complex nature of quantum objects, like photon and electron as wave
and as particle can be summarized as follows. These objects are described
in terms of incompatible properties that cannot be observed together at the
same time, but together they give a complete picture of the behaviour of
these objects. The properties of wave and particle are mutually
incompatible, yet the complete description of the nature of quantum objects
includes both. These two properties complement each other, but they are
not simultaneously observable. If we set up an experiment to measure the
wave-like aspect of a quantum object, we lose information about its
particle-like characteristic. In a converse experiment, we cannot get
information about its wave-like character. There is no way, in principle, to
observe both properties at once and get information about both. The
principle of complementarity shows that quantum reality is undetermined
and that our grasp of it can never be complete.80

      We close our discourse on ‘The Quantum Wavicles' with a quote from
Einstein, which succinctly summarizes the meaning of ‘wavicle': “We are
faced with a new kind of difficulty. We have two contradictory pictures of
reality [wave-particle]; separately neither of them fully explains the
phenomena of light, but together they do.”81

2.3. The Quantum Uncertainty
      Wave-particle duality is the first pillar of quantum physics, and
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle is the second. Both of these concepts are
intimately related. John Hawley and Katherine Holocomb remark: “The
fact that only probabilities, and not absolute certainties, can be assigned to
[quantum] states is ultimately a consequence of the wave nature of
particles; this lies at the heart of Heisenberg's famous uncertainty
principle.”82 Indeterminism in the quantum world follows from uncertainty
principle.

2.3.1. The Uncertainty Principle

     Heisenberg's uncertainty principle is the fundamental law which
governs the dynamics of quantum objects - of wave-particles. Interactions
in the quantum world are ruled by uncertainty relation. This law teaches
fundamental uncertainty in the behaviour of quantum systems. The
characteristics of our everyday world — that objects have definite positions
and speeds at particular times, and that they have definite energies at
definite times — are now seen to be utterly meaningless in the quantum
world. According to classical physics, if we know the initial conditions of a
physical system, such as a particle or its aggregate, we can know
simultaneously and with certainty positions and speeds of the future states
of that system. In fact, the classical mechanics requires the simultaneous
knowledge of both these conjugate quantities with certainty for the
prediction of the evolution of physical systems. By contrast, in quantum
mechanics, it is impossible to know simultaneously with precision where a
quantum object is (its position), and what its velocity is (its momentum).
For, these properties of quantum objects are governed by Heisenberg's
uncertainty principle. De Broglie contrasts the positions of classical
physics and quantum mechanics:

       We can realize the difference which exists on this score
       between the old [classical] and the new [quantum] mechanics
       by noting that the elements [position and velocity, for instance]
       whose simultaneous knowledge at the initial instant was
       necessary in classical mechanics in order to be able to predict
       rigorously the evolution of a system, are precisely those whose
       simultaneous determination is impossible according to the
       Uncertainty Relations.83

     In general, the uncertainty principle can be formulated as follows:
“The uncertainty principle states that if the value of some physical quantity
is certain, then the value of a complementary quantity is uncertain.”84 De
Broglie spells out uncertainty principle in detail:

       Indeed, as the fine and profound analyses of Heisenberg and
       Bohr have shown, it follows from the existence of the quantum
       of action that all attempts to measure a characteristic quantity
       of a given system has the effect of changing in an unknown
       fashion the other quantities associated with this system. More
       precisely, any measurement of a quantity which permits the
       exact localization of a system in space and time has the effect
       of changing in an unknown fashion a quantity which is
       conjugate with the first and which serves to specify the
       dynamic state of the system. In particular, it is impossible to
       measure at the same time and with precision any two conjugate
       quantities. . . . .

       From the above it follows that we are never able to know with
       precision more than half the quantities, the knowledge of
       which would be necessary for an exact description of a system
       in accordance with classical ideas. The value of a quantity
       characterizing a system is indeed that much more uncertain
       when that of its conjugate quantity is more exactly known.85

     The uncertainty principle thus expresses a trade-off between the
degree of certainty about the value of one physical quantity, such as
position and its complementary quantity, namely, velocity. The more the
value of one quantity is certain, the less certain is the value of the other.
Consequently, the position and velocity of a subatomic particle, like an
electron, cannot be simultaneously determined with certainty. If position is
accurately calculated, velocity remains uncertain, and vice versa.
Heisenberg emphatically affirms: “Any use of the words ‘position' and
‘velocity' with an accuracy exceeding that given by the uncertainty
equation is just as meaningless as the use of words whose sense is not
defined.”86

     In order to illustrate the behaviour of quantum particles governed by
uncertainty principle, let us imagine a world in which the flight of a tennis
ball cannot be predicted in terms of Newton's laws of motion. In such a
world, the trajectory of the ball would not be determined by the thrust of
the racket; and the laws in this world would give us only probabilities of
the motions of the ball. Although games would be played in accordance
with the rules of tennis, even the most proficient player would not succeed
in sending the ball in the intended direction even if the ball is struck in the
appropriate way. In the description of such a world, the expression ‘ball
with a determinate position and velocity' would not be employed and would
be found meaningless. In this imagined world, tennis balls behave in a
manner in which photons and electrons behave in the quantum world. Their
motions are governed by uncertainty principle.87

     Heisenberg devised a thought experiment in order to clarify the
meaning of uncertainty principle; it is known as ‘gamma ray microscope
experiment.' It is designed to observe the position and velocity of an
electron. Heisenberg suggested gamma ray as the medium for observation
because it has the shortest wavelength. The shorter the wavelength of
radiation used, the more accurate is the determination of position. If we use
such high-frequency gamma rays, we can locate the position of an electron
with greater precision, just as a ruler with millimeter graduations
determines more precisely the length of an object than the one with
centimeter graduations. But the problem here is that gamma rays which
have a much shorter wavelength than visible light, also has much more
energy than visible light. Such energetic rays will impart an unpredictable
amount of energy to the electron disturbing its course. Renowned physicist
Arthur Eddington confirms: “We can improve the determination of the
position with the microscope by using the light of shorter wavelength, but
that gives the electron a greater kick and spoils the subsequent
determination of momentum.”88 In this way, we can measure accurately
only its position, but not its velocity because the gamma ray would cause
an unpredictable change in electron's momentum. Hence, in order to
determine with great precision the velocity of an electron, we need to
disturb it as little as possible. If we use low-frequency (less energetic)
radiation, we minimize the impact on electron's motion and determine its
velocity more precisely since the radiation has comparatively low energy.
But then we sacrifice precision in determining electron's position; that is,
we cannot locate its position accurately. Heisenberg observed an inverse
proportion between the precision with which one measures
electron's/photon's position and the precision with which one measures its
momentum. The more accurately the position is determined, the less
accurately the momentum is measured and vice versa.89

     However, Bohr objected to the presuppositions of Heisenberg's
‘microscope experiment.' The thought experiment assumed that the
electron had an actual path, and that at each instant it had a definite
position and momentum which was then disturbed by observation. It
presumed that the electron really possesses definite properties, and that it is
the interaction with measuring apparatus which prevents us from knowing
them exactly. Bohr argued vehemently against such classical
presuppositions being carried over to quantum physics. For, the electron
has no path; and it has no definite, independent properties, like position and
momentum. Davies comments:

       It is not that quantum mechanics is inadequate to predict the
       precise positions, motions, etc. of particles; it is that a quantum
       particle simply does not possess a complete set of physical
       attributes with well-defined values. It is meaningless to even
       consider an electron, say, to have a precise location and motion
       at one and the same time.90

Gribbin shares a similar view:

       The essential feature of Heisenberg's discovery-- indeed, in
       many ways the essential feature of quantum physics -- is that
       the entity we call ‘an electron' does not possess both a well-
       defined    position    and a       well-defined momentum,
       simultaneously. There is an intrinsic uncertainty, which has to
       do with the way the Universe is put together, and has nothing
       to do with the skill, or otherwise, of human experimental
       physicists.91

     This means that quantum uncertainties cannot be reduced by more
precise measurements; they are irreducible. This is another way of saying
that such uncertainties are inherent to the nature of subatomic particles.
Davies clarifies:

       Most physicists interpret quantum uncertainty to be intrinsic,
       and not merely the result of human ignorance or clumsiness in
       measurement. One might express this by saying that even the
       electron is uncertain of its properties. Thus quantum
       uncertainty cannot be ameliorated by ‘looking harder'. In this
       respect, it stands in contrast to random chance in, say, a game
       of roulette, or movements in the stock market. Changing share
       prices certainly have their causes in something: if they appear
       random and unpredictable it is because humans do not have all
       the information they need to work out how they vary. Quantum
       randomness, by contrast, is irreducible, which is to say that
       quantum processes are in some sense genuinely spontaneous -
       without any specific cause.92

Differently expressed, quantum uncertainty is not a consequence of the
limitations of human knowledge. Rather uncertainty belongs to the very
nature and behaviour of quantum objects themselves. Hence, uncertainty
principle actually says something deeper than merely stating that we cannot
know at any instant both position and momentum of a quantum particle
with certainty; it says that a particle does not possess both a definite
position and a definite momentum simultaneously. Consequently, if we
measure accurately the position, we lose information about the momentum,
and vice versa. Either can be known as precisely as possible, but only at the
expense of the knowledge of the other. Indeed, uncertainty principle states
something essential about the nature of quantum particles.

     This principle is ordinarily stated in terms of position and velocity of
subatomic particles. But it is applicable also to other conjugate quantities,
like energy and time. Just as we cannot know simultaneously the position
and momentum of a quantum particle with precision, so there is a
limitation to the accuracy with which we can measure its energy within a
given interval of time. The uncertainty principle relates these two
quantities in the same way as it links mutual uncertainties of position and
momentum. Thus, if a particle's energy in a quantum state is known with
precision, then the time it spends in that state - its duration -- cannot be
known with certainty. But if its duration in that state is known precisely,
then its energy cannot be known with certainty. In other words, if we know
the state of energy of a particle exactly, then we are not certain about the
amount of time that it is likely to remain in that state. Conversely, if we
know precisely the length of time the particle has been in that state, we
would be uncertain about its energy state. Greene observes: “Quantum
mechanics asserts that you can't say that a particle has precisely such-and-
such energy at precisely such-and-such moment in time.”93

      The effect of uncertainty relation on physical systems is extremely
small in everyday terms since the Planck constant ‘h’ (‘h-bar') is also
exceedingly minute. The more massive the object is, the less the
uncertainty. To get a ‘feel' of how Heisenberg's uncertainty principle has
effect on various objects, we make the following comparisons. For a flying
tennis ball, the uncertainties are only one part in about ten million billion
billion billion (10-34). Hence, a tennis ball obeys the deterministic laws of
classical physics to a high degree of accuracy. Even for a bacterium,
uncertainty effects are only about one part in a billion (10-9), and so it
really does not experience the quantum world. With atoms in a crystal, we
are getting down to the quantum world, and the uncertainties are one part in
a hundred (10-2). Finally, for an electron with a mass of just 10-37 gram, the
uncertainty effect can be significant. Quantum uncertainties completely
dominate these particles and we have entered the true quantum world
governed by uncertainty relations.94

     We conclude our narrative on ‘The Uncertainty Principle,' with an
insightful quote from Greene:

       The uncertainty principle captures the heart of quantum
       mechanics. Features that we normally think of as being so
       basic as to be beyond question — that objects have definite
       positions and speeds and that they have definite energies at
       definite moments — are now seen as mere artifacts of Planck's
       constant being so tiny on the scales of the everyday world. Of
       prime importance is that when this quantum realization is
       applied to the fabric of spacetime, it shows fatal imperfections
       in the ‘stitches of gravity’ and leads us to the third and primary
       conflict physics has faced during the past century.95

2.3.2. The Quantum Indeterminism

     Indeed, the quantum indeterminism follows from Heisenberg's
uncertainty principle. Pagels confirms: “Physicists found that the
uncertainty relations implied indeterminacy.”96 In order to comprehend
indeterminism in quantum physics, we contrast it with the rigorous
determinism of classical physics - both of Newton's mechanics and of
Einstein's theory of relativity. Newton's laws of motion determine
completely the future behaviour of any physical system if its initial
conditions at any given instant of time, and forces acting on it are fully
known. De Broglie explains the meaning of determinism in classical
mechanics:

       THE EQUATIONS of classical mechanics completely determine the
       motion of a system when the position and state of motion of
       the parts of the system are known at the initial instant. Thus the
       classical motion of a corpuscle is completely predictable when
       its position and velocity are known at a certain initial instant.
       This possibility of predicting in an inexorable way the future of
       a mechanical system when a certain amount of data about its
       present state is known constitutes the determinism of classical
       mechanics.97

As part of classical physics, the theory of relativity also presupposes strict
determinism. Physicist Benjamin Gal-Or states:
       By contrast, the classical space-time of general relativity
       remains fully deterministic at all scales. While it is also a
       dynamic entity which changes according to the distribution of
       mass, energy, and momentum, it nevertheless remains well-
       defined, once that distribution has been defined. It always, at
       any scale, defines a specific time relationship to the concept of
       (strict) causality. In other words, causality is strictly obeyed in
       any formulation of the general theory of relativity.98

One of the reasons why Einstein could not accept quantum physics was his
firm conviction that it eschews such rigorous determinism.

      In contrast to Newtonian and relativistic determinism, quantum
mechanics teaches intrinsic indeterminism in the quantum world.
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle in effect states such indeterminism: that
it is impossible to determine simultaneously the precise values of
conjugate quantities, like position and momentum of quantum objects.
Obviously, such uncertainties are negligible in the case of physical objects
and systems of the ordinary world, and rigorous determinism rules such a
world. But on the subatomic level, uncertainties about the simultaneous
knowledge of conjugate quantities are considerable, and forbid their
deterministic description. Prigogine and Stengers write: “Quantum
mechanics deals with only half of the variables of classical mechanics. As a
result, classical determinism becomes inapplicable, and in quantum physics
statistical considerations play a central role.”99 De Broglie compares the
determinism of classical mechanism with the indeterminism of quantum
physics:

       In the old [classical] physics, the simultaneous knowledge of
       the quantities fixing the position of the parts of a system and of
       the conjugate dynamic quantities permitted, at least in
       principle, a rigorous calculation of the state of the system at a
       later instant. . . . This possibility of a rigorous forecasting of
       future phenomena starting from present phenomena, a
       possibility implying that the future is in some manner
       contained in the present and adds nothing to it, constituted
       what has been called the determinism of natural phenomena.
       But this possibility of a rigorous forecasting requires the exact
       knowledge at the same instant of time of the variables of
       spatial localization and of the conjugate dynamic variables;
       now, it is precisely this knowledge which quantum physics
       considers impossible.100

      We illustrate the contrast between Newtonian determinism and
quantum indeterminism with a standard problem in ballistics. Suppose a
gun is fired, and we know both the position and momentum of the bullet as
it leaves the barrel. Using the laws of classical physics and the knowledge
of bullet's initial conditions, such as its weight, position and momentum,
we can precisely determine its entire future trajectory. However, if we
consider the same problem from the standpoint of quantum mechanics, we
reach a different conclusion. Heisenberg's uncertainty relation implies that
we cannot simultaneously know with precision both the position and
momentum of the bullet at the instant it leaves the barrel. To the extent that
these initial measurements are uncertain, the future trajectory of the bullet
cannot be determined. All we can do is to give a statistical or probabilistic
prediction of the future trajectory of the bullet. For real bullets and tennis
balls, the uncertainty effects are negligible. But for subatomic particles,
like electrons, we can give only a probabilistic description of their future
path. This is quantum indeterminism. Davies spells out:

       In classical mechanics one must know both the positions and
       the momenta of all the particles at the same moment to predict
       the subsequent evolution of the system. In quantum mechanics
       this is forbidden. Consequently there is an intrinsic uncertainty
       or indeterminism in how the system will evolve. Armed even
       with the most complete information permitted about a quantum
       system it will generally be impossible to say what value any
       given quantity (e.g. the position of a particle) will have at a
       later moment.101

    De Broglie finds the ultimate foundations of classical determinism
and quantum indeterminism in their respective conceptions of space-time
framework:

       The manner in which classical physics conceived the absolute
       determinism of physical phenomena rested essentially on the
       manner of thinking about space and time and the theory of
       relativity, while revising so profoundly our ideas relative to
       space and to time, had, however, sufficiently respected them so
       as not to breach classical determinism. It is not the same with
       the quantum theory. The latter, by not allowing us any longer to
       represent the evolution of individual phenomena in a
       continuous manner in the framework of space and time, obliges
       us to abandon determinism completely, or at least to modify
       profoundly the conception we had of it. . . . Indeed, the present
       quantum theory furnishes us only with laws of probability,
       allowing us to say what, the result of the first observation
       being given, is the probability that a later observation will
       furnish us such and such a result. This substitution of laws of
       probability for rigorous laws in the microscopic domain is
       certainly bound up with the non-validity of the concepts of
       space and time in this domain. 102

     However, although quantum mechanics teaches uncertainty and
indeterminism, there is a sense in which it is still a deterministic theory.
Prigogine and Stengers suggest: “If the wave function at a given instant is
known, Schrodinger equation allows it to be calculated for any previous or
subsequent instant. From this viewpoint, the situation is strictly similar to
that in classical mechanics.”103 Davies explains the meaning of
determinism in quantum mechanics:

       In spite of the indeterminism that is inherent in quantum
       physics, a quantum system can still be regarded as
       deterministic in a limited sense, because the wave function
       evolves deterministically. Knowing the state of the system at
       one time (in terms of the wave function), the state at a later
       time can be computed, and used to predict the relative
       probabilities of the values that various observables will possess
       on measurement. In this weaker form of determinism, the
       various probabilities evolve deterministically, but the
       observable quantities themselves do not.104

     Thus in quantum mechanics, determinism consists in the prediction of
the probable state of a quantum system. This means that although the result
of a particular quantum event may not be determined, the relative
probabilities of different outcomes evolve in a deterministic manner. That
is, probability distributions are causally determined, not specific events.
Hawking tells us:

       These quantum theories are deterministic in the sense that they
       give laws for the evolution of the wave with time. Thus if one
       knows the wave at one time, one can calculate it at any other
       time. The unpredictable, random element comes in only when
       we try to interpret the wave in terms of the positions and
       velocities of particles.105

That is to say, physicists can calculate the probability of a quantum event,
such as an atomic nucleus decaying, taking place even though they cannot
know for certain the actual outcome in that particular case. In this sense as
a statistical theory, quantum mechanics is a deterministic theory. That is
why machines like computers and mobiles which depend for their
functioning on the behaviour of innumerable quantum particles like
electrons can still function reliably even though the behaviour of each
individual electron within the machine cannot be predicted. Paul Davies
and John Gribbin aptly remark: “Quantum physics builds chance into the
very fabric of reality, but a vestige of the Newtonian-Laplacian world view
remains.”106

     Although scientists still use deterministic laws of classical mechanics
to deal with events and motions of objects of everyday life, their attitude
toward determinism has been profoundly altered by the new insights
provided by quantum mechanics. Pagels suggests how quantum
indeterminism might influence the perspectives of physicists:
       It [quantum indeterminism] implied the existence of physical
       events that were forever unknowable and unpredictable. Not
       only must human experimenters give up ever knowing when a
       particular atom is going to radiate or a particular nucleus
       undergo radioactive decay, but these events are even unknown
       in the perfect mind of God. 107

Pagels explains why quantum events are undetermined even for God:

       Even an all-knowing mind must support its knowledge with
       experience, and once it tries to experimentally determine one
       physical quantity the rest of the deck of nature gets randomly
       shuffled again. The very act of attempting to establish
       determinism produces indeterminism. There is no randomness
       like quantum randomness. Like us, God plays dice — He, too,
       knows only the odds.108

      Eminent physicists like Born, Eddington, Heisenberg and Bohm have
strongly supported indeterminism in the quantum world. Born frankly
asserts that quantum theory is “in the nature of the case indeterministic,
and therefore the affair of statistics.”109 Likewise, Eddington remarks: “It is
impossible to trap modern physics into predicting anything with perfect
determinism because it deals with probabilities from the outset.”110
According to Heisenberg, quantum indeterminism is the manifestation of a
very fundamental and all-pervasive general principle that governs all of
nature. Bohm comments about Heisenberg's view on indeterminism: “Thus,
rather than consider the indeterminacy relationships primarily as a
deduction from the quantum theory in its current form, he [Heisenberg]
postulates these relationships directly as a basic law of nature and assumes
instead that all other laws will have to be consistent with these
relationships.”111

      In contrast, great physicists, like Einstein and Schrödinger, regarded
indeterminism of the quantum world as an indication of man's limited
ability to penetrate the details of natural processes, not as a description of
how nature works. Einstein was a staunch supporter of classical
determinism, and could not reconcile himself with indeterminism in nature.
Pagels remarks: “The indeterminism of the quantum theory is an issue of
principle, of what is knowable and unknowable, not experimental technique
— that is what distressed Einstein. Even God can give you only the odds
for some events to occur, not certainty.”112 Einstein found the concept of
quantum indeterminism so shocking that he dismissed it with the famous
retort that “God does not play dice with the Universe.” He spent much of
his later years searching the deterministic elements that he thought must lie
hidden beneath the apparently random world of quantum mechanics.113

     We conclude our narrative on ‘The Quantum Uncertainty,' with de
Broglie's comment on the deep impact of quantum indeterminism on
classical determinism:

       Nevertheless, although a great many fundamental reforms still
       seem necessary to us in order to have a clear understanding of
       quantum physics, personally it does not seem probable that we
       will succeed in completely re-establishing the determinism of
       days gone by. The blows that the development of the new
       [quantum] mechanics have [sic] delivered to it [classical
       determinism] seem to us too deep-seated to be easily effaced.
       The wisest course, no doubt, is to hold to this statement: at the
       present time, the physics of phenomena where quanta play a
       part, is no longer deterministic.114

2.4. The Quantum Wave Function and Its Collapse

     Now, the baffling question is, is there something that would
conceivably ‘tame' the quantum ‘beast' with its strange nature of wave-
particle duality governed by uncertainty principle? Is there any overarching
concept that would bring together these bizarre characteristics and
uncertainties of quantum objects? That concept, according to quantum
physics, is the wave function. Whereas wave-particle duality and
uncertainty principle are the two pillars of quantum mechanics, wave
function is truly its foundation. The collapse of the wave function ‘gives
birth' to one of the multiple possibilities conceived in its ‘womb.'
2.4.1. The Quantum Wave Function

     The wave function is the central concept in quantum physics. “The
fundamental theoretical quantity in quantum mechanics is the wave
function.”115 In fact, the word ‘wave function' underlines the importance of
wave-particle duality in quantum mechanics. Prigogine and Stengers
suggest: “The term ‘wave function’ has been chosen to emphasize once
again the wave-particle duality so fundamental in all quantum physics.”116
Polkinghorne explains how the behaviour of an electron in double-slit
experiment is the outcome of its wave function:

       [T]he electron's state is a superposition of the state in which it
       goes through one slit with the state in which it goes through the
       other. The diffraction pattern on the detecting screen
       corresponds to the interference effects between these two
       components, added together to form the single wavefunction
       describing the electron's state.117

Zukav gives a simple description of the concept of wave function:

       In more general terms, it [wave function] describes physical
       reality at the most fundamental level (the subatomic) that
       physicists have been able to probe. According to quantum
       mechanics, the wave function is a complete description of
       physical reality at that level. Most physicists believe that a
       description of the substructure underlying experience more
       complete than the wave function is not possible.118

Physicist Julian Barbour likewise says: “The wave function of a particle is
assumed to be a maximal representation of its physical state. It codes
everything that can ever be deduced about the particle at an instant. Using
it, we can predict the outcome of experiments performed on the
particles.”119

    The wave function thus comprises everything about the state of a
quantum system. It encapsulates everything that can be known about a
quantum object before an observation is made. The wave function is
symbolized by the Greek letter psi (ψ) which represents the mathematical
description of the state of an isolated quantum system.120 Hence, wave
function is called also ‘psi-function.' Here is another description of the
wave function referring to it as psi-function:

       In quantum mechanics, wave function is the variable quantity
       that mathematically describes the wave characteristics of a
       particle. The value of the wave function of a particle at a given
       point of space and time is related to the likelihood of the
       particle's being there at the time. By analogy with waves such
       as those of sound, a wave function, designated by the Greek
       letter psi, ψ , may be thought of as an expression for the
       amplitude of the particle wave (or de Broglie wave), although
       for such waves amplitude has no physical significance. The
       square of the wave function, ψ2, however, does have physical
       significance: the probability of finding the particle described
       by a specific wave function y at a given point and time is
       proportional to the value of ψ2.121

     According to quantum physics, every physical entity, whether it is an
atom or a bullet, has a wave function associated with it. It is not to be
thought of as a material thing like waves in water. The wave function
describes all the possibilities that a quantum system ‘comprises' before it
interacts with an observing system or a measuring device. “It would be a
composite of all the possibilities of the observed system which it
describes.”122 The wave function ‘represents,' not any actual state of a
quantum object, but a superposition of all its possible states. It ‘contains'
all the potential behaviour of a quantum system. The wave function
‘includes' the wave-particle nature of quantum object, and its properties,
such as position and velocity, and energy and time. Coveney and Highfield
suggest: “Accordingly, his equation [Schrödinger's] includes a completely
new mathematical quantity called the wavefunction which takes into
account the Jekyll and Hyde character of tiny particles and maps out all the
possibilities of their behaviour.”123 Further, the wave function is not static,
but it is dynamic and ever-changing. Zukav says: “This strange animal
[wave function] constantly would change with the passage of time. Each
moment it would be different than the moment before.”124

    The concept of wave function can be best clarified by contrasting it
with the idea of initial conditions/actual state in Newtonian mechanics.
Davies explains initial conditions:

       In classical mechanics the state of a system [initial conditions]
       is easily visualized. It is given by specifying the positions and
       velocities (or momenta) of all the particles concerned. The
       system evolves as the particles move about under the influence
       of their mutual interactions and any externally applied forces.
       The physicist can predict this evolution, at least in principle,
       by the use of Newton's laws of motion to compute the paths in
       space of each particle.125

      However, in quantum physics, we speak of wave function rather than
initial conditions of a system as in Newtonian mechanics. “Quantum
mechanics replaces this concrete picture of the state of mechanical system
by an abstract mathematical object called wave function or the state
vector.”126 Similarly, Bohm says: “In other words, the actual and individual
object of classical physics is replaced by a more abstract kind of potential
and statistical object. This latter is said to correspond to the ‘quantum state
of the system', which in turn corresponds to ‘the wave function of the
system’ (or more generally to a vector in Hilbert space).”127 Thus, the state
of the system in classical mechanics is called initial conditions, and the
‘state of the system' in quantum physics is called wave function. But we
hasten to add that this is an understatement, and that it does not tell us the
whole truth. For, according to classical physics, the initial conditions of a
physical object are actual states which comprise its properties, such as
position, velocity, mass and shape, at a given instant of time; whereas in
quantum mechanics, we cannot speak about such actual states apart from
experimental conditions. Bohm observes:

       In classical physics, one thinks that only the actual state of a
       system can be relevant in a physical situation, and that
       probability comes in either because we are ignorant of the
       actual state or because we are averaging over an ensemble of
       actual states that are distributed over a range of conditions. In
       quantum theory it has no meaning to discuss the actual state of
       a system apart from the whole set of experimental conditions
       which are essential to actualize this state.128

     Thus, the actual state of a system, according to classical mechanics,
comprises its initial conditions; and the comparable concept in quantum
physics is the wave function which, however, does not represent the actual
state of a quantum object simply because no such state exists. As far as the
quantum object's actual state is concerned, the wave function has to
collapse in order to ‘produce,' so-to-speak, this state by actualizing one of
its possibilities in the act of measurement. Consequently, the wave function
‘represents' an ensemble of its possibilities, not actual states. For instance,
an electron's character of wave-particle duality and its properties of
position and momentum are not actual states, but are possible ones. There
are also other conjugate properties of an electron, like energy and time
which are also not actualities, but are only possibilities that are described
by its wave function. Hence, the state of a quantum object is a world of
possibilities and probabilities, not actualities, and the wave function is said
to describe such a state. We summarize the concept of wave function in the
words of Bohm:

       Every physical situation is now characterized by a wave
       function (or more abstractly by a vector in Hilbert space). This
       wave function is not directly related to the actual properties of
       an individual object, event, or process. Rather, it has to be
       thought as a description of the potentialities within the
       physical situation. Different and generally mutually
       incompatible potentialities (e.g., for wavelike or particle-like
       behaviour) are actualized in different experimental
       arrangements (so that the wave-particle duality can be
       understood as one of the main forms for the expression of such
       incompatible potentialities). In general, the wave function
       gives only a probability measure for the actualization of
       different potentialities in a statistical ensemble of similar
       observations carried out under specified conditions, and cannot
       predict what will happen in detail in each individual
       observation.129

     The wave function thus describes the possibilities of the state of a
quantum system; and Schrödinger equation calculates their probabilities
becoming actual. This equation predicts probabilities of quantum events
occurring, but cannot predict with certainty what will actually happen in a
given case. This law does not predict, for instance, an electron's actual
location when landing on the image screen in double-slit experiment; but it
only calculates the probabilities of finding electron at many points on the
screen when an observation is made. The reason is that the electron simply
does not possess an actual set of physical properties with well-defined
values, such as position and velocity; these are but potentialities of the
electron.130

2.4.2. The Collapse of the Wave Function

     Now, the question is, how do the possibilities of a quantum object
represented by its wave function achieve actuality? How do these turn into
actual states and get related to the real world in which events definitely
happen or do not happen? Davies answers: “If a quantum system is in a
superposition of states, a definite reality can only be observed if the wave
function collapses on to one of the possible observable states.”131
According to the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics,
possibilities achieve definiteness and actuality, only if something happens
to collapse the wave function. Prior to this collapse, all possibilities are on
an equal footing. The wave function collapses in the act of measurement/
observation, and one of the possibilities becomes actual. Although the
quantum world is inherently indeterminate, and Schrödinger equation
predicts only probabilities of the wave function, the act of measurement
transforms probability into certainty, and converts one of the possibilities
into actuality by selecting from a range of possibilities. “This
transformation, from the plethora of potential outcomes to the one
observed, is known as the ‘reduction' or the ‘collapse' of the
wavefunction.”132 In the act of measurement/ observation, the wave
function collapses and one of the possibilities become real, and acquires
definiteness and determination. Zukav explains:

       In other words, making a measurement interferes with the
       development in isolation of the observed system. When we
       interfere with the development in isolation of the observed
       system (which is what Schrödinger’s wave equation governs)
       we actualize one of the several potentialities that were a part of
       the observed system while it was in isolation.133

Similarly, Julian Barbour says: “It is not that before the measurement a
particle does have a definite momentum, and we simply do not know it.
Instead, all momenta in the superposition are present as potentialities, and
measurement forces one of them to be actualized.”134

     For example, in the double-slit experiment the wave function of an
electron describes innumerable possibilities of pathways on its way from
the source to the image screen. As the electron is fired from an electron
gun, its wave function would continue to evolve according to the law of
Schrödinger equation. But the equation does not predict the exact location
where the electron will land; it tells us only the probability of the electron
arriving at several points on the screen. This probability of spotting the
position of electron on the screen varies exactly the same way as the
predicted wave intensity differs. It has a small probability of landing at
many points over a wide area and greater probability to land in other
regions. When the electron actually hits an image screen, such as a
photographic plate, and is observed at a particular spot on it, at that instant
one of the possibilities in the wave function would actualize and others
would cease to exist. In other words, the probability of the electron's being
at that point suddenly becomes one, and zero at all other points; that is, its
wave function collapses. When measurement/ observation is stopped, the
electron evolves into a new superposition of possibilities, only to collapse
again, perhaps in a different way in another measurement.135 Coveney and
Highfield illustrate:

       If we adopt the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum
       mechanics, there are an infinite number of possible outcomes
       of which just one becomes actuality when we ‘pop' the
       wavefunction. Imagine you are sitting in a quantum theatre.
       There is an endless profusion of possible plays which might
       take place, from Shakespeare to Coward to Ibsen to Wilde. But
       as soon as the curtains swing apart the theatre wavefunction
       collapses to reveal Agatha Christie's The Mousetrap.136

     However, if a particular measurement is repeated over and over again
in completely identical manner, for instance, for measuring the position of
an electron on the image screen, the same outcome will not be obtained
again and again. Rather, the subsequent repetitions of experiment will yield
a variety of results about the particular position of electron. Barbour
comments: “Every measurement ‘collapses' the wave function. After the
collapse, the wave function, which could have been used to predict
outcomes of alternative measurements, has been changed irrevocably: there
is no going back to the experiment we opted not to perform. It is a very
singular business.”137 Thus, one measurement of the electron's location on
the image screen alters its behaviour irreversibly. In fact, as Coveney and
Highfield point out, a local collapse of a wave function has effect
everywhere in the universe:

       When a measurement is performed at the screen to find out
       where the electron is, the wavefunction collapses. But although
       measurement is made locally, the collapse of the wavefunction
       alters the physical state of the electron everywhere at the same
       instant - remember that the wavefunction contains every
       possibility for that electron in space and time, not just the one
       that emerges when the wavefunction collapses. . . . An
       observation at any given point causes the collapse of a state of
       potentiality (all possible outcomes) to a state of actuality (the
       outcome observed), which is then fixed everywhere in the
       universe at one and the same instant.138

     In order to illustrate the quantum weirdness of the collapse of wave
function, Schrödinger devised a thought experiment in 1935, which is
famously known as “Schrödinger's cat.” It is narrated umpteen times, but
no discourse on quantum physics can ignore its presentation. Imagine that a
live cat is caged inside a closed box. The box contains a flask with poison
(like hydrogen cyanide) inside, a small amount of radioactive material, a
Geiger counter and a hammer. If the hammer is triggered, it would break
open the flask, release poison and the cat would be killed. The hammer will
be triggered only if the Geiger counter detects disintegration of one atom of
radioactive material. The sequence of events would be the following: one
of the atoms of radioactive material decays, Geiger counter detects it,
hammer is triggered and it breaks open the flask, poison is released, and the
cat is killed. (See Figure 13) The radioactive atoms, being quantum objects,
will disintegrate in such a way that the probability of their disintegration
can be calculated according to the law of Schrödinger equation.




                      Figure 13. Schrödingers'cat
     In this thought experiment, we assume that after a specified time, say
one hour, the probability of one atom disintegrating is exactly fifty percent.
This means that there is a fifty percent probability that the flask has been
broken and the cat is killed; and a fifty percent probability that the atom
did not disintegrate and the cat is still alive. We wait for one hour, and then
open the box and look inside. From the common sense point of view, what
we expect to find — and what we will actually find — is that the cat is
either alive or dead. There is a fifty-fifty chance for the atom to decay, and
consequently for the cat to be either alive or dead. But what does the
quantum theory say about the situation prior to opening the box? It states
that before we looked at the cat, it was both alive and dead at the same
time! Or, more precisely, the state of the cat was a mixture: fifty percent
live cat and fifty percent dead cat!! Schrödinger is quoted to have said that
these two states of the cat are “mixed or smeared together by equal
amounts.”139

      According to quantum mechanics, the wave function of the cat in the
box represents a superposition of two possibilities: of the live cat and of the
dead cat. In the one case, the atom decays, Geiger counter detects it,
hammer is triggered and it breaks open the flask, poison is released, and the
cat is dead; and in the other case, which has equal probability, none of these
happens, and the cat remains alive. In the ghostly hybrid state, the cat
cannot be regarded as definitely either dead or alive, but in some strange
way both. For the physicist who accepts the Copenhagen interpretation,
nothing is real unless it is observed. S/he has not opened the box, and has
not peered inside it; and so neither of the two possibilities of radioactive
material and also of the cat, has any actuality. Without the scientist's actual
observation, the atom has neither decayed nor has not decayed, and
consequently the cat has neither been killed nor not been killed. The
radioactive material would be in a superposition of states, and so would be
the cat. However, once the physicist looks inside the box, the atom is either
decayed or not decayed; and the cat is then dead or alive. Hence, if we are
to take the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics seriously, the
cat in the box exists in some indeterminate state of being alive and dead:
the wave function of the cat comprises the superposition of these two
possible states. Only when the box is opened and the state of the cat is
observed, and the cat's wave function collapses, does it actually ‘become'
either alive or dead. Davies and Gribbin remark: “It is as if nature suspends
judgement on the fate of the poor creature until somebody peeks. But this
raises the obvious question: What is going on inside the box when nobody is
looking?”140

     The cat story is deliberately contrived to highlight the paradoxical
character of the collapse of wave function in a dramatic way, but similar
phenomena occur whenever any quantum event takes place involving
subatomic particles. The oddity of collapse of wave function is that it
seems to depend upon the action of the observer. It appears that if nobody
observes, then the wave function does not collapse. Hence, the behaviour of
a particle, such as an electron, appears to vary according to whether it is
being observed or not. This is deeply disturbing to physicists, but may not
be a big problem for ordinary people. Many physicists are very uneasy
about the view that the wave function of a quantum system collapses when
it is observed by an observer. They are averse to giving a role to conscious
observers in a fundamental physical theory, such as quantum mechanics;
they are wary of the thought that quantum reality ultimately depends on
conscious observer.141

     As an alternative to the Copenhagen interpretation, Hugh Everett III
and Bryce DeWitt proposed the Many Worlds hypothesis. Everett rejected
the idea of the collapse of wave function when a measurement is made by
an observer; in fact, he wanted to eliminate the involvement of conscious
observers in the quantum process. According to Many Worlds hypothesis,
wave function never collapses, as held by Copenhagenists. Instead, all
quantum possibilities represented by wave function actually exist, each in
its own universe. In this perspective, possibility is identical with actuality,
and so infinite possibilities of everything and also of the observer are
somehow actualized. As Polkinghorne puts it, “everything that could
happen does happen.”142 Barbour summarizes Many Worlds hypothesis:

       Collapse does not happen at all: the multiple possibilities
       represented in the entangled state continue to coexist. In each
       possibility the observer, in different incarnations, sees
       something different, but what is seen is definite in each case.
       Each incarnation of the observer sees one of the possible
       outcomes that the Copenhagen interpretation assumes is
       created by collapse.143

     If the wave function does not collapse, how do we experience a
definite, actual world? According to Many Worlds hypothesis, with each
measurement of a quantum system, like measuring the position/velocity of
an electron, the universe splits into a multiplicity of mutually unobservable
and independent domains. When the measurement of a quantum object is
made, suddenly and imperceptibly the universe is divided into an infinite
number of observing subjects in an infinite number of new universes.
Definiteness emerges from infinite possibilities because all these
possibilities are actualized in multiple universes which are all ‘real.'
Conscious observers also divide endlessly into multiple copies, and these
too actualize all possibilities. For a fleeting moment, we observe a
determinate universe. Here the word ‘universe' does not mean ‘all spatio-
temporal reality.' Rather, it refers only to the limited domain of the
observer and the observed system. Only that restricted region of the
universe involved in the measurement of quantum objects divides; but
unobserved regions do not split. Here is an interesting quote from De Witt,
one of co-authors of Many Worlds hypothesis, about his head-reeling
experience upon learning about Everett’s proposal of this theory: “I still
recall vividly the shock I experienced on first encountering this multiworld
concept. The idea of 10100+ slightly imperfect copies of oneself all
constantly splitting into further copies, which ultimately become
unrecognizable, is not easy to reconcile with common sense. Here is
schizophrenia with a vengeance. . .”144

     According to Many Worlds hypothesis, then, all possibilities that the
wave function of a quantum object describes are real, and all of them
actualize in different worlds that co-exist with ours. When a measurement
is taken, the universe divides into these multiple actualities, and we
observe one of them. On the other hand, according to Copenhagen
interpretation, the wave function describes an ensemble of possibilities;
only one of them collapses and actualizes when an observation is made, and
the rest of them continue to evolve perhaps to collapse in another
measurement. Thus, we have two contrasting explanations of the
measurement of a quantum system - the one Copenhagen interpretation and
the other Many Worlds hypothesis.

     We conclude with the words of John Gribbin and Martin Reese who
contrast both theories: “Where Copenhagen theory says that none of the
quantum options has any reality unless it is observed, many Worlds theory
says that all quantum possibilities really do exist, each in its own space and
time, and that each measurement we make simply identifies which branch
of the multi-universe we are in.”145

2.5. The Quantum Reality Itself

      So far in our discourse, we focused on the ‘stuff' of quantum objects,
their properties and their causal interactions. The quantum reality, we saw,
is characterized by wave-particle duality which is governed by
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle; these are subsumed under the concept
of wave function which collapses when a measurement is made. Now, the
question is, what is the kind of reality that such quantum objects have?
Copenhagenists led by Niels Bohr, and EPR (Einstein, Podolsky, Rosen)
team under the leadership of Einstein locked horns over the quantum-
reality problem. Incidentally, EPR paradox highlighted an important
property of subatomic particles, namely, their non-locality.

2.5.1. The Strange Quantum World

      Quantum mechanics has been extremely successful in explaining
countless physical phenomena. Its predictions have been confirmed again
and again during the last century. Its practical applications in technology
have produced many electronic manufactured goods which have become
part of modern life. However, the reality of quantum objects themselves
was/is an enigma even to great physicists, like Bohr, Heisenberg and
Einstein. Moreover, quantum theory contains within itself a number of
conceptual paradoxes which even after over a century of its origin remain
unresolved. According to Cambridge physicist John Polkinghorne “the
greatest paradox about quantum theory is that after more than fifty years of
successful exploitation of its techniques its interpretation still remains a
matter of dispute.”146 Likewise, Pagels comments: “Here, for the first time,
arose the astonishing problem of physically interpreting the mathematics of
the new mechanics, a problem quantum physicists would be struggling with
in the coming years.”147 Physicist Nick Herbert wryly remarks: “One of the
best kept secrets of science is that physicists have lost their grip on
reality.”148 In fact, there were intense or even acrimonious exchanges
between the Copenhagen school led by Bohr and the EPR team with
Einstein as its principal advocate about the strange properties of quantum
reality without ever reaching any conclusion.

     Before we examine the nature of quantum reality, let us recount the
saga of quantum mechanics we have narrated so far. The twin concepts of
quantum physics, namely, wave-particle duality and Heisenberg's
uncertainty principle have shaken the foundations of classical, Newtonian
mechanics and of our common sense world of everyday experience. A
quantum particle, such as a photon or an electron, we saw, behaves both as
a wave and as a particle. Further, according to uncertainty principle, we
cannot measure with certainty the conjugate properties of quantum objects,
like position and momentum at the same time. Uncertainty relation appears
to have wrecked cause-effect relations in the quantum world. Moreover, the
quantum wave function and its collapse add further twist to ‘matter myth,'
as Davies calls it. Furthermore, the observed quantum system and the
observer seem to be intimately linked. Bohm remarks that according to the
Copenhagen interpretation, “in an observation carried out to a quantum-
mechanical level of accuracy, one must regard the entire ensemble
consisting of observing apparatus and observed system as indivisibly
united by the quanta connecting them.”149 The Many Worlds hypothesis
about the measurement of quantum objects is still more bizarre: our
universe is said to be dividing endlessly every time a quantum
measurement/observation is made. Indeed, the quantum world appears
weird and strange when contrasted with the Newtonian universe and our
ordinary world of experience.

     In fact, the quantum mechanics has wilted away the meanings of some
of the fundamental concepts of classical mechanics and of our common
sense language. Thus, what we ordinarily call a ‘thing' or ‘physical object'
appears to have ‘melted away' in the quantum world. R. Blanché writes: “In
brief, the several attributes of the substantial thing, res, are gradually
withdrawn. Reality rests against a background of unreality: the
infrastructure of the microphysical world has no more than a ‘ghostly
existence', its reality ‘dissolving in the shadows' (P. Jordan).”150 Similarly,
Polkinghorne points out: “The existence of such elusive [quantum] objects
clearly modified our notion of reality. One of the perplexities about the
interpretation of quantum mechanics is what, if any, meaning it attaches to
the reality of something as protean as an electron.”151 That is the reason
why many scientists believe that in spite of its extraordinary success in
making predictions and its astonishing achievements in technology,
quantum mechanics does not tell us the whole story about physical reality.
According to eminent physicists, like Einstein, Schrödinger, de Broglie,
Paul Dirac and Bohm, quantum theory, no matter how well it works, is not a
complete theory because it does not provide a comprehensive picture of
reality. On the contrary, Bohr and Heisenberg, the great stalwarts of the
Copenhagen interpretation hold that this theory has no story to tell us about
reality; indeed, it is just incapable of doing it.

     The complexities and weirdness of the quantum world raise many
questions about its reality. Greene asks a number of general questions about
the quantum mystery:

       What are we to make of this? Does it mean that on a
       microscopic level the universe operates in ways so obscure and
       unfamiliar that the human mind, evolved over eons to cope
       with phenomena on familiar everyday scales, is unable to fully
       grasp ‘what really goes on'? Or, might it be that through
       historical accident physicists have constructed an extremely
       awkward formulation of quantum mechanics that, although
       quantitatively successful, obfuscates the true nature of reality?
       No one knows.

       Maybe some time in the future some clever person will see
       clear to a new formulation that will fully reveal the ‘whys' and
       the ‘whats' of quantum mechanics. And then again, may be not.
       The only thing we know with certainty is that quantum
       mechanics absolutely and unequivocally shows us that a
       number of basic concepts essential to our understanding of the
       familiar everyday world fail to have any meaning when our
       focus narrows to the microscopic realm. As a result, we must
       significantly modify both our language and our reasoning when
       attempting to understand and explain the universe on atomic
       and subatomic scales.152

     Further, we can ask also some specific questions about the reality of
quantum objects and about uncertainty principle. Can we assume whether
or not a quantum particle like an electron continues to be at a place and at a
time like an ordinary physical object? Does uncertainty relation affect only
our knowledge, or does it also affect the ‘real' position or ‘real' momentum
of a particle? There are a number of difficulties even in raising such
questions. They may turn out to be meaningless because they presuppose
the concept of classical object, which is not applicable to quantum object.
Renowned philosopher of science Marx Wartofsky observes: “That is, in
the new theory [quantum mechanics] the meaning of particle has changed
and no longer countenances a simultaneous determination of the precise
values of the classical particle.”153 The classical meaning of physical object
is completely changed in quantum theory.

     Then there is the most important question about the status of wave
function, or of the quantum state it ‘represents,' namely, the superposition
of the possibilities of quantum objects and their properties. We cannot
interpret the quantum state described by wave function in any naïve,
ordinary sense of the term. Nevertheless, the wave function is treated by
quantum physicists with a degree of seriousness which accords it a status
going beyond that of mere calculational device. Oxford mathematician
Roger Penrose argues:

       Despite the fact that we are normally only provided with
       probabilities for the outcome of an experiment, there seems to
       be something objective about a quantum-mechanical state
       [wave function]. It is often asserted that the state- vector is
       merely a convenient description of ‘our knowledge' concerning
       a physical system -- or, perhaps, that the state-vector does not
       really describe a single system but merely provides
       information about an ‘ensemble' of a large number of similarly
       prepared systems. Such sentiments strike me as unreasonably
       timid concerning what quantum mechanics has to tell us about
       the actuality of the physical world.154

Similarly, Polkinghorne opines about the ‘frail' reality of the wave
function:

       The wave function is the vehicle of our understanding of the
       quantum world. Judged by the robust standards of classical
       physics it may seem a rather wraith-like entity. But it is
       certainly the object of quantum mechanical discourse and, for
       all the peculiarity of its collapse, its subtle essence may be the
       form that reality has to take on the atomic scale or below.155

Finally, there is the knotty question about the collapse of the wave function.
Polkinghorne asks:

       How does the act of measurement unscramble those
       superposed possibilities and plump for one of them on a
       particular occasion? In the jargon of the subject this perplexity
       is called the problem of ‘the collapse of the wavefunction' --
       probability which was spread out over ‘here', ‘there' and,
       perhaps, ‘everywhere', suddenly is focused on the actually
       realized result of the observation. It is somewhat humiliating
       for the physicist to have to confess that there is no universally
       agreed or wholly satisfactory answer to that reasonable
       question.156

      Faced with the bizarre concepts and principles of quantum mechanics,
quantum physicists soon found themselves divided into two camps. The
one group was led by Niels Bohr who argued that this theory deals only
with ‘phenomena,' presented by the abstract mathematical formalism, and
that it does not, and cannot, provide us a deeper insight into reality; this is
the Copenhagen interpretation. The other camp under the leadership of
Einstein maintained that quantum mechanics should give us a complete
picture of reality, and that in its current formulation, it cannot be regarded a
complete theory in physics; this position is presented by the EPR
paradox.157
2.5.2. The Copenhagen Interpretation and the EPR Paradox

     We have placed the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics
and EPR paradox in a sequel because the discussions between the
proponents of both these positions bring into bold relief the question about
the nature of quantum reality. The Copenhagen interpretation, we know,
emerges from the work of Bohr and Heisenberg who were the leading
advocates of this view. Their position was countered by Einstein and his
team members, Boris Podolsky and Nathan Rosen; they proposed a
thought-experiment which is famously known as the ‘EPR paradox.'

2.5.2.1. The Copenhagen Interpretation

      The Copenhagen interpretation is in fact the first response to the
question about the nature of quantum reality. According to Bohr, what
quantum mechanics knows is not the reality itself, but the ‘phenomenon'
which “refers exclusively to observation obtained under specific
circumstances, including an account of the whole experiment.”158 The
concept of phenomenon here includes, not only the quantum object itself,
but also the experimental set up which is employed to observe it; and so the
knowledge of quantum reality is determined, not merely by the object
alone, but by the conditions of observation also. In other words, the
experimental arrangement partially determines observational results, and
consequently also the meaning ascribed to observed object. Such a quantum
object with ascribed meaning is called ‘phenomenon.' Thus for instance, if
the double-slit experiment gives us information that electron is wave-like
in its nature, that information is a product, not only of the electron, but also
of the particular experimental set up. Photoelectric effect is a different
experiment, and so it would supply us knowledge about the particle-like
behaviour of the electron. Since the experimental arrangement at least
partially determines the outcome of observing the electron, our knowledge
of it is determined, at least in part, by how we know it. Heisenberg says: “If
one wants to clarify what is meant by ‘position of an object', for example of
an electron, he has to describe an experiment by which the position of an
electron can be measured; otherwise this term has no meaning at all.”159
Hence, we cannot say anything about the position or velocity of an electron
without also specifying how (that is, by means of which experiment) we
determine them. The same applies to any observed property of quantum
objects. The very process of measurement evidently assumes considerable
importance in this view, whereas it had been completely ignored in
classical physics.

      Such a view emphasizes the observer's role in selecting which
property of quantum object is to be measured, for instance, waveaspect or
particle-aspect. Depending upon this choice, knowledge of different
properties of quantum reality is obtained. Consequently, the
Copenhagenists apparently hold that as long as observation decides the
attributes of a subatomic particle, there is no need to refer to a deeper
reality. Bohr and Heisenberg and other prominent physicists who accept the
Copenhagen interpretation, have spoken to this effect. Bohr's statement
sums up the Copenhagen view: “There is no quantum world. There is only
an abstract quantum physical description. It is wrong to think that the task
of physics is to find out how nature is. Physics concerns what we can say
about nature.”160 Likewise Heisenberg says: “What we learn about is not
nature itself, but nature exposed to our methods of questioning.”161
Princeton physicist John Wheeler draws the ultimate consequences of the
Copenhagen interpretation: “No elementary phenomenon is a real
phenomenon until it is an observed phenomenon.”162

     In fact, all these quotes referring to the Copenhagen interpretation
have a distinctively Kantian flavour. They state in effect that we can know
only phenomena - things as they appear in knowledge, not noumena -
things-in-themselves. This is in short the gist of the philosophy of the great
German philosopher Immanuel Kant. In his Critique of Pure Reason, Kant
divided the possible objects of knowledge into phenomena and noumena.163
Phenomena are objects as they appear to the knowing subject, and noumena
are things-in-themselves which supposedly exist independently of the
subject. Herman Philipse summarizes Kant's view on knowledge: “Kant's
transcendental turn implies a distinction on the one hand the objects as we
may experience them (phenomena) which are partly constituted by the
knowing subject, and on the other hand entities as they are in themselves
(noumena).”164 Davies and Gribbin spell out what is meant by phenomena
in the context of quantum physics:

       Quantum mechanics enables us to relate different observations
       made on, say, an atom. The theory is to be regarded as a
       procedure for connecting these observations into some sort of
       consistent logical scheme - a mathematical algorithm. Use of
       the word ‘atom' is just an informal way of talking about that
       algorithm. It is a helpful meaning of encapsulating that
       abstract concept in physical language, but that does not mean
       that the atom is actually there as a well-defined entity with a
       complete set of physical attributes of its own, such as definite
       location in space and definite velocity through space. . . . The
       term ‘atom' itself became merely a code word for a
       mathematical model [phenomenon]. It was not intended to
       represent an independent part of reality.165

     This is indeed a quantum mechanical rendering of the philosophy of
Kant. Bohr and Heisenberg would say that the phenomenon -algorithm (the
mathematical model of atom) - is “partly constituted by the knowing
subject.”166 Bohr himself states as much when he says that phenomenon
“refers exclusively to observation obtained under specific circumstances,
including an account of the whole experiment.”167 Philosopher T. Z. Lavine
explains Kant's concept of phenomenon which is applicable to the
Copenhagen interpretation:

       Nature does not give the human mind its laws, Kant has
       discovered. It is the other way around. The mind gives its own
       laws to nature - its own laws in the form of its own necessary
       concepts which organize all sensory materials. These are the
       concepts which form, organize, and structure all our
       experience, all our knowledge of nature. In Kant's famous
       words, ‘Mind is the law-giver to nature.' Thus the laws of
       nature are dependent upon the concepts of the human mind.
       With the philosophy of Kant, the world has become mind-
       dependent, as the American philosopher C. I. Lewis has said.168
In the present context, we may render the last statement in the quotation as
follows: “With the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum physics, in
particular with the views of Bohr and Heisenberg, the quantum world has
become mind-dependent.” That is to say, the properties of quantum objects
appear to be dependent on the observer.

     If these musings on the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum physics
are taken seriously, then the objectivity of the quantum world is called into
question. Hence, we have no access to ‘raw' quantum reality or
noumenon/thing-in-itself in Kantian terms. Renowned quantum physicist
Babu Joseph argues:

       For, one of the key postulates of quantum mechanics is that the
       process of extracting information or knowledge from a system
       is by performing an experiment or observation, which involves
       the preparation for, plus the execution of, the act. Hence, it is
       often surmised that a ‘raw' system by itself doesn't have a
       physical identity of itself. The composite system plus observer
       or knower alone makes sense and it is this combination or
       ‘complex' which is considered dynamical (capable of
       evolution).169

Likewise, physicist Henry Stapp draws a similar conclusion when he says
that there is no substantive physical world:

       If the attitude of quantum mechanics is correct, in the strong
       sense that a description of the substructure underlying
       experience more complete than the one it provides is not
       possible, then there is no substantive physical world, in the
       usual sense of this term. The conclusion here is not the weak
       conclusion that there may not be a substantive physical world
       but rather that there definitely is not a substantive physical
       world.170

    Zukav too voices a similar opinion:
       The Copenhagen Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics does
       not go so far as to say what reality is ‘really like behind the
       scenes,' but it does say that it is not like it appears. It says that
       what we perceive to be physical reality is actually our
       cognitive construction [phenomenon in the Kantian sense] of
       it. This cognitive construction may appear to be substantive,
       but the Copenhagen Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics
       leads directly to the conclusion that the physical world itself is
       not.171

     The Copenhagen interpretation says in effect that it is unnecessary to
peer ‘behind the scenes' to see what is really happening as long as quantum
mechanics works in different experimental conditions; that is, as long as it
correlates experiments correctly and makes predictions. It is not necessary
to know, for instance, how light can manifest itself both as waves and
particles. It is enough to know that it does, and to use this knowledge to
predict probabilities. But then, there is no comprehension of the reality of
light. Truly, this limitation of our knowledge is inescapable; we can know
only quantum phenomena. Hence, we cannot give a description of quantum
objects as they really exist in themselves - noumena in Kantian terms.
Heisenberg strongly affirms: “The hope that new experiments will lead us
back to objective events in time and space is about as well founded as the
hope of discovering the end of the world in the unexplored regions of the
Antarctic.”172

     We summarize the Copenhagen view in the pithy words of quantum
physicist John Bell. He suggests that “in quantum physics, ‘be-ables'
[noumena] are replaced by ‘observables,' [phenomena] and the verb ‘to be'
becomes ‘to be measured.'”173 The British idealist philosopher George
Berkeley stated as much when he said: esse est percipi -- to be is to
perceived. This view denies the objectivity of human knowledge; more than
that it apparently rejects the existence of an external world independent of
the knowing subject. May we suggest that the Copenhagen view epitomized
by the statements of Bohr, Heisenberg and Bell affirms as much with
regard to the quantum world?
2.5.2.2. The EPR Paradox

     Not all physicists, however, were prepared to accept the Copenhagen
interpretation of quantum mechanics. Foremost among them was Einstein
who relentlessly opposed it. At the outset, he believed that quantum theory
was simply incorrect by being inconsistent. But his repeatedly unsuccessful
skirmishes with Bohr eventually led him to change his critical line of
attack; he came to regard quantum theory, not as incorrect but rather as
incomplete. In some way, the whole structure of quantum mechanics,
especially as interpreted by the Copenhagen school, was completely at odds
with his thinking. Although Einstein was one of the pioneers of quantum
physics with his interpretation of photoelectric effect, in the later
development of the theory in the mid-1920s, he was no longer in the
forefront; and he did not creatively contribute much to the further progress
of quantum physics.

      Einstein expressed his disdain for indeterminism and statistical,
probabilistic character of the laws of quantum mechanics in different
contexts -- in most cases with his famous symbolic expression of
‘throwing/playing the dice.' We are familiar with his celebrated quip, “God
does not play dice.” In the following quotes from Einstein, there is
invariably the reference to the unpredictable dice. In a letter, addressed to
Max Born in 1926, he says: “Quantum mechanics is certainly imposing.
But an inner voice tells me that it is not yet the real thing. The theory says a
lot, but does not bring us any closer to the secret of the Old One [God]. I, at
any rate, am convinced that He does not throw dice.”174 In another letter to
Born, Einstein declared: “You believe in God playing dice and I in perfect
laws in the world of things existing as real objects, which I try to grasp in a
wildly speculative way.”175 In a letter, written much later to James Franck,
Einstein wrote:

       I can, if the worst comes to the worst, still realize that the
       Good Lord may have created a world in which there are no
       natural laws. In short, a chaos. But that there should be
       statistical laws with definite solutions, e.g., laws which compel
       the Good Lord to throw dice in each individual case, I find
       highly disagreeable.176

The great quantum physicist Paul Dirac who contributed much to the
development of quantum theory agrees with Einstein's view:

       I think it might turn out that ultimately Einstein will prove to
       be right, because the present form of quantum mechanics
       should not be considered as the final form. . . . I think that it is
       quite likely that at some future time we may get an improved
       quantum mechanics in which there will be a return to
       determinism and which will therefore justify the Einstein point
       of view.177

      Einstein did not think that quantum theory was incorrect, for it agreed
with experiments; but he believed that it gives an incomplete description of
physical reality, and denies objectivity and determinism in the quantum
world. He says: “I am therefore inclined to believe that the description of
quantum mechanism . . . has to be regarded as an incomplete and indirect
description of reality, to be replaced at some later date by a more complete
and direct one.”178 In another context, he strongly affirms: “I am in fact
firmly convinced that the essentially statistical character of contemporary
quantum theory is solely to be ascribed to the fact that this theory operates
with an incomplete description of physical systems.”179 Einstein's
objections were thus based on the apparent indeterminism and denial of
causality in quantum mechanics. He held on to the classical view of
determinism to the end of his life. For him, it was unthinkable that there
are arbitrariness and chance in the fundamental structure of the universe.
Einstein's vision of the eternal laws of nature that govern all physical
reality left no room for indeterminism and chance. Indeed, the Copernican
interpretation of quantum physics appeared to go against his instincts.

     In order to counter the claims of the Copenhagen interpretation,
Einstein with his colleagues Podolsky and Rosen wrote a paper in 1935,
proposing a thought experiment leading to what is often called ‘the EPR
paradox.'180 The EPR (Einstein, Podolsky, Rosen) paper expressed Einstein's
conviction that the standard Copenhagen interpretation of quantum physics
and the objectivity of quantum world are incompatible. The EPR paradox is
based on the following incompatible stipulations. Quantum mechanics
predicts that once two particles have been related to each other, they
continue to instantaneously affect each other, no matter how far they may
be separated. But we know from the theory of relativity that no signal can
travel faster than light. There is no way in which one particle can relate to
another faster than light. In other words, quantum theory requires that the
two particles affect each other even though they cannot exchange signals
fast enough to causally influence each other. This is the gist of EPR
paradox. Davies describes the EPR experiment in simple words:

       He [Einstein] conceived of an experiment in which two
       particles interact and separate to a great distance. Under these
       circumstances the quantum state of the combined system can
       be such that a measurement performed on one particle
       apparently affects the outcome of measurements performed on
       the other, distant, particle. This he found so unsettling he
       dubbed it ‘spooky action-at-a-distance'.181

The EPR experiment describes a counter-intuitive ‘togetherness-in-
separation' by which quantum entities which have once interacted with each
other retain the capacity of instantaneous, mutual influence, however far
apart they may be.

     The EPR paradox was originally formulated in terms of position and
momentum of an electron. It was later reformulated by David Bohm
employing the concept of spin. Subatomic particles like electrons have the
property called ‘spin.' If the electron spins clockwise on its axis, it is
described as spin-up; if it spins counterclockwise, it is called spin-down.
The crucial property of a spinning electron, which cannot be understood in
classical terms, is the fact that its axis of rotation cannot always be defined
with certainty; electrons merely show tendencies to spin about certain axes.
But whenever a measurement is performed for any axis of rotation, the
electron will be found to spin in one or the other direction about that axis.
In other words, the act of measurement gives the particle a definite axis of
rotation, but before the measurement is taken, it cannot generally be said to
spin about a definite axis; it merely has a certain tendency or potentiality to
do so.

     The EPR experiment involves two subatomic particles, say, electrons
which interact and then separate to a vast distance. An important aspect of
the experiment is that the distance between the two particles can be
arbitrarily large; one particle may be in New Delhi and the other on the
Moon or on a distant star. Now, suppose the two electrons are made to drift
apart by some process that does not affect their spins. They go off in
opposite directions, and when they are separated by a large distance, their
individual spins are measured. According to quantum theory, both electrons
are spinning in a limbo state - ‘up or down' -- until a measurement is made.
Suppose now that the spin of particle 1 is measured and is found to be ‘up.'
Because of the quantum correlation between the two particles, this
measurement tells us that the spin of particle 2 must be ‘down.' Thus, by
measuring the spin of particle 1 we obtain an indirect measurement of the
spin of particle 2 without in any way disturbing that particle. There is no
need for us to make a measurement of the spin of 2; it is known as soon as
we measure the spin of 1 because of the correlation existing between the
two particles. This ghostly action-at-a-distance seems to imply that the two
particles communicate by a physical effect which propagates faster than
light because there is no time for particle 2 to receive information by any
conventional signal.

     The paradoxical aspect of the EPR experiment consists in the fact that
the observer is free to choose the axis of measurement. As we saw, the
spins of two electrons about any axis exist only as tendencies or
potentialities before the measurement is taken. Once the observer has
chosen a definite axis and has performed the measurement, this act will
give both particles a definite axis of rotation. The crucial point is that we
can choose our axis of measurement at the last minute when electrons are
already far apart. At the instant we perform our measurement on particle 1,
particle 2 which may be thousands of miles away, will acquire a definite,
correlate spin along the chosen axis. Now, the question is, how does particle
2 come to know which property of spin has been chosen - ‘up' or ‘down' --
so that it can decide the correlate spin? How can these two particles
communicate so quickly? The problem is that it is impossible for particle 2
to receive such information by any conventional signal because it may be
quite far away from particle 1; and according to the theory of relativity, no
signal can travel faster than light. There is no way a sudden change in
particle 1 can cause a synchronized change in particle 2, or vice versa since
such a signal cannot instantaneously reach from the one to the other. In
other words, since no signal can travel faster than the speed of light, it is
impossible that the measurement performed on the spin of particle 1 will
instantly determine the spin of particle 2 thousands of miles away. Two
correlated particles act in harmony, even though they cannot exchange
signals fast enough to causally influence their harmonious action. This is
the crux of the EPR paradox.

     The EPR solution to the paradox was that the two particles cannot be
considered as one undivided system; and so if particle 2 measures the
correlate spin value of particle 1, it is only because the former possessed
that value before measurement. Since particle 2 could not be physically
affected by the measurement of particle 1, EPR concluded that it must have
had the definite spin value before the measurement on particle 1 was made.
Hence, it cannot be said that particle 2 acquires the correlate spin value as
soon as the spin value of particle 1 is measured. In short, the EPR team
held that both particles objectively possessed the appropriate spin values
before measurement; and thus EPR affirmed the objectivity of the quantum
world.

     However, Bohr completely disagreed with the EPR interpretation.
According to him, the two-particle system is an indivisible whole, even if
the particles are separated by a great distance. Although particle 1 is many
light years away from particle 2, they are nevertheless linked by
instantaneous, nonlocal connections. Such a two-particle system cannot be
analyzed in terms of independent parts. If two particles are correlated with
each other, they continue to instantaneously affect each other even if they
are widely separated. The measurement of the spin of particle 1 influences
the spin (up or down) of particle 2; because of the quantum correlation of
two particles, particle 2 immediately adopts the opposite spin (up or down)
of particle 1. Julian Barbour explains this correlation between the two
particles in terms of wave function: “Provided we know the original wave
function, acquired knowledge about one particle sharpens our knowledge -
instantaneously - about the other.”182 He continues:

       As I have already explained, innumerable interference
       phenomena indicate that, in some sense, the particles are,
       before any measurement is made, simultaneously present
       wherever y extends. Since there is no restriction on the
       distance between the particles, any causal effect on the second
       particle after the first has been observed would have to be
       transmitted instantaneously.183

      As we wind up our discussions on EPR paradox, we note that Einstein
firmly rejected non-local connections among quantum objects which have
once interacted. By opposing the idea of nonlocal influence, he wanted to
demonstrate that quantum mechanics is an incomplete theory. Coveney and
Highfield point out: “The contention of the EPR paradox was to show from
this analysis that quantum theory cannot support an objective description of
reality, and that it is incomplete since it involves such unphysical ‘nonlocal'
correlations.”184 In their paper on EPR paradox, Einstein and his colleagues
caustically referred to non-locality: “No reasonable definition of reality
could be expected to permit this.”185

2.5.3. The Quantum Wholeness

     Indeed, the EPR paradox has unwittingly stumbled upon an important
property of quantum objects, namely, their non-locality/ entanglement.
Davies suggests: “The lesson of EPR is that quantum systems are
fundamentally non-local. In principle, all particles that have ever interacted
belong to a single wave function - a global wave function containing a
stupendous number of correlations.”186 The phrase ‘quantum entanglement'
refers to such global interrelations of all particles.

2.5.3.1. The Quantum Non-locality
      In fact, non-locality follows from the fundamental nature and
properties of quantum particles. The quantum object characterized by
wave-particle duality which is governed by uncertainty principle, and
whose wave function collapses when a measurement is made, would have
the property of non-locality just because such an entity cannot be localized.
The non-local property of quantum objects is so strange that it was missed
at first. Most of the early applications of quantum physics were to systems
with only one particle, which did not disclose the possibility of sharing
their properties among widely separated particles. The EPR thought
experiment focused precisely on the problem of non-locality, albeit
negatively. The EPR paper is Einstein's famous statement of his rejection of
non-locality in quantum physics. By contrast, Niels Bohr, Werner
Heisenberg and the Copenhagen school strongly advocate non-local
connections among quantum objects.

     Non-locality is essentially characterized by action-at-a-distance. “This
[non-local effect] means that something affects something else that is not
within its immediate area.”187 In fact, Einstein was wont to refer to non-
locality as ‘spooky action-at-a-distance.' “In physics, action at a distance is
the concept that an object can be moved, changed, or otherwise affected
without being physically touched (as in mechanical contact) by another
object. That is, it is the nonlocal interaction of objects that are separated in
space.”188 Physicist Menas Kafatos and Robert Nadeau explain the meaning
of quantum non-locality:

       The character of physical reality as predicted by quantum
       physics was non-local, meaning that correlations between
       results would hold in spite of the fact that the regions in space
       in which they would be observed would be too distant from one
       another to allow signals traveling at the speed of light to travel
       between the two points in the time allowed.189

In non-local interaction, one body influences another without the mediation
of bodies between them. That is to say, a non-local interaction
instantaneously travels across void without any medium. Since non-local
influences act instantaneously, the speed of their transmissions is not
limited by the velocity of light. Further, nonlocal effects do not diminish
with distance. They are as powerful at one million miles distance as at one
millimeter.

     An example of non-local interaction is the so-called ‘voodoo' injury.
When a voodoo practitioner sticks a pin in his/her doll, the distant target is
(supposedly) instantly wounded, although nothing actually travels from
doll to victim. Believers in voodoo claim that an action here causes an
effect there. Coveney and Highfield compare voodoo influence with the
non-local effect in observing an electron: “The mere observation of that
electron sends out instantaneous repercussions to the farthest reaches of the
universe, with no more explanation than of how a voodooist may hurt
someone located miles away by sticking pins into a wax effigy.”190 Non-
local influences link up quantum particles at one location with other
particles at different places instantaneously without crossing space; such
interactions are unmediated, unmitigated and immediate. Polkinghorne
says: “Quantum entities exhibit a counterintuitive togetherness-in-
separation, a power once they have interacted to influence each other
however far they subsequently separate.”191 In fact, the EPR paradox is the
clearest statement of non-local influences. Robert Russell observes that
“nature reveals a highly non-local and wholistic character at the quantum
level which is strikingly different from the separability of nature in our
ordinary experience.”192 Reputed physicists like John Bell believe that there
are innumerable non-local influences in the universe. In fact, such
influences are present, not only in rare and exotic circumstances, but they
appear to lie behind all the events of everyday life. They are ubiquitous.193

     The concept of non-locality can be further clarified by comparing it
with the notion of locality which is the hallmark of the classical world of
Newton and Einstein. Bohm contrasts the quantum concept of non-locality
with the classical notion of locality:

       One finds a peculiar new property of non-locality of
       connection, i.e., a close rapport between particles or other
       elements (e.g., fields) that may be distant from each other. This
       violates the classical mechanical requirement of locality of
       connection . . . . This latter requirement is that the basic
       elements constituting the universe (whether particles or fields)
       are strongly connected, only when they are in contact in space,
       or else, infinitesimally close together.194

The property of locality requires that events happening here and now are as
a rule directly caused by events which occur immediately in nearby space
and time. Davies says: “The property of locality has to do with the fact that,
in most cases, the behavior of a physical system is determined entirely by
the forces and influences that arise in its immediate vicinity.”195 For
instance, body A affects body B locally when it either touches B, or touches
C which is in physical contact with B. However, the term ‘local' does not
necessarily mean that the two objects or events are near to each other; they
may be millions of miles part, but may have local interaction as in the case
of gravitational force.

      Obviously, locality is a fact of our every day experience of the world
around us; it refers to the way in which physical objects, such as metals,
stones, apples or people, are connected to, or interact with, one another; it
describes how information is transferred from one object to another. For
example, if some iron filings are spread on a sheet of paper which is placed
on top of a magnet, the filings will arrange themselves in a definite pattern
around the magnet. If a second magnet is brought near the first, then the
filings will be rearranged into a different pattern. Between the magnets and
the filings there is some kind of communication, a signal or a force which
defines the resultant pattern. Locality has to do with the nature of such
communication, that is, how signals are transmitted in the world around us.
Truly, the macroscopic world of our experience runs on the principle of
locality. Physicist John Barrow remarks: “The hallmark of the entire non-
quantum world is that things occurring here and now are directly caused by
events that occurred immediately nearby in space and time: this property
we term ‘locality' to reflect the fact that it is the most local events that
exert the predominant influence upon us.”196 Until recently, physicists
believed that the universe functions strictly by means of local
communications and influences.
     Newtonian mechanics explains interactions between bodies through
local forces such as gravity. Locality is also one of the fundamental
presuppositions of Einstein's theory of relativity, and he considers it as
being an “absolutely inevitable requirement for any reasonable physical
theory.”197 Pagels comments:

       A principle of physics that he [Einstein] held even more dear
       than determinism was the principle of local causality — that
       distant events cannot instantaneously influence local objects
       without any mediation. What the EPR argument did without
       making any assumption about determinism or indeterminism
       was to show that quantum theory violated local causality. This
       finding startled most physicists, because they too held the
       principle of local causality sacred. 198

The toughest limitation to local interactions is the speed at which they can
travel. According to the theory of relativity, no physical object can travel
faster than light. Hence, the limit of local causality is determined by the
velocity of light. This is the main reason why in the EPR experiment,
Einstein strongly objected to the hypothesis of instantaneous interactions
between two correlated particles which are very distant.

     Although the EPR paradox served to heighten the debate between
Einstein and Bohr on non-local correlations among quantum objects, they
had no conclusive proof, for or against, the property of non-locality. Such a
proof was provided by Bell's inequality theorem. In his paper published in
1964, John Stuart Bell proposed a simple mathematical theorem for testing
the results of EPR experiment. Bell in fact achieved a significant
sharpening of the EPR paradox. “The essence of the original paradox is the
existence of correlations between pairs of quantities -- pairs of positions or
pairs of momenta -- that are always verified if one correlation or the other
is tested.”199 More specifically, it means that independent measurements
performed on widely separated particles which have interacted, yield
correlated results; for instance, correlations of the spin of a particle with
the spin of another particle both of which have interacted. This in itself is
not surprising because if the particles diverged from a common origin, each
will have retained an imprint of their contacts. However, what is important
is the degree of correlation among them. This was investigated by Bell.
Davies writes: “Bell showed that quantum mechanics predicts a
significantly greater degree of correlation than can possibly be accounted
for by any theory that treats the particles as independently real and subject
to locality.”200 This is the core of Bell's inequality theorem.

     Bell's procedure in simple words is the following. First, make a series
of paired measurements on two particles (in practice, photons) whose states
have been linked together by interaction in an appropriate way; and then
study the degree of correlations which exist between the results obtained
with one photon and the results obtained with the other. Second, proceed to
derive certain ‘inequalities' that impose upper limits on the degree of
correlations that the measurements of classical entities (assumed to be
local) could exhibit; tighter correlations would simply be a logical
impossibility. If quantum objects exceed this limit of the degree of
correlations, and thus break ‘Bell inequalities,' it would mean that they
would have the property of non-locality; and EPR thought experiment
would then be proved wrong. Bell demonstrated that quantum objects do
violate these inequalities, and that these objects are more tightly correlated
than any conceivable classical objects. In the words of Polkinghorne: “Bell
showed that, if the underlying theory were purely local, with no strange
effects at a distance, then there was a bound (the Bell inequality) on how
closely correlated the results could prove to be.”201 However, quantum
theory predicted the violation of this bound - the Bell inequality; and so
quantum objects would have the property of non-locality. According to
John Barrow, Bell's theorem “showed that any theory purporting to describe
the reality behind experiments like that proposed by Einstein and his
colleagues must possess non-local features if a simple arithmetical
condition is satisfied. Quantum mechanics meets the Bell conditions for
there to exist non-local interactions.”202 Barrow suggests that unlike other
theorems in physics, there is something unique to Bell's theorem: “What is
most striking, and quite unique, about Bell's proof is that it demonstrates a
necessary logical property of any theory of reality, not just a property of its
observed manifestations as do all other theorems of mathematical physics:
if your view of reality is the right one, then it must be a non-local one.”203
     Bell's theorem can be clarified with the example of a chance event,
like tossing a coin. Tossing a coin and getting head or tail is an ordinary
affair. We may get head or tail alternately, sometimes two heads or two tails
in a row. It is a chance business. Now, we can postulate that the maximum
number of getting heads in a row is five. This postulate would impose a
limit beyond which ordinarily it is not possible to obtain heads in a row.
But suppose that a person tosses a coin and gets heads that exceed this
limit, say, ten heads in a row; and also that this happens now and then. We
are inclined to think that something extra-ordinary is happening. We may
come to attribute some unique property to the coin or some magical power
to the one who tosses it. The extra-ordinary occurrences of obtaining ten
heads in a row do violate the postulate about tossing the coin. Bell's
inequality in this case would then be the postulate of getting five heads in a
row. Violation of this postulate by obtaining ten heads in a row time and
again would represent non-locality.204

     In order to test Bell's inequality theorem, the French physicist Alain
Aspect and his team in 1982 devised a decisive experiment which most
physicists now accept. Their experiment showed that the degree of
correlations of quantum objects actually violated Bell's inequality theorem.
Aspect's experiment thus confirmed non-local connections over distances
up to twenty six meters. This may not appear a great distance, but it is to be
noted that it is 1022 times greater than atomic domain. The experiment
contradicted theories that assume locality, and it confirmed non-locality in
the quantum world. Hence, if Aspect's experiments showed that quantum
objects obey Bell's theorem, Einstein and EPR experiment would be proved
right; but if these objects violated the theorem, Einstein would then be
proved wrong. Aspect's experiment demonstrated the latter alternative.
After Aspects' experiments, several investigators have checked Bell's
theorem experimentally, and the results have been conclusive: quantum
particles interact non-locally. Once two particles have interacted with one
another, they remain linked in some way as parts of the same indivisible
system. Indeed, the quantum world is characterized by non-locality. This
means that if two quantum objects, such as two photons, have interacted,
we cannot separate the description of the properties of one of them from
the description of the properties of the other. Incidentally, Aspect's
experiment “suggests that the space-time of quantum physics is remarkably
different from that of Einstein's relativity [and certainly that of Newton's
mechanics.]”205 This distinguishing mark of spacetime consists in the fact
that “there is no here and there or that here is identical to there. This gives
space and time a property that is called ‘nonlocality.'”206

2.5.3.2. The Quantum Entanglement

     ‘The Quantum Entanglement' is in fact a continuation of, and
complement to, ‘The Quantum Non-locality.' Apparently, both phrases
mean the same. However, it is appropriate to make a distinction:
entanglement is the quantum reality of which nonlocality is the property.207
Physicists ordinarily use the term ‘nonlocality' when they discuss EPR
paradox, Bell's theorem and Aspect's experiment. But the phrase, ‘quantum
entanglement' is used in a global context and in a broader sense than
‘quantum non-locality.' Quantum entanglement has to do with the fact that
all quantum particles which have once interacted belong to a universal
wave function containing innumerable correlations. Quantum entanglement
is thus an all-inclusive quantum phenomenon. “Quantum entanglement is a
physical phenomenon that occurs when a pair or group of particles is
generated, interact, or share spatial proximity in a way such that the
quantum state of each particle of the pair or group cannot be described
independently of the state of the others, including when the particles are
separated by a large distance.”208 Schrödinger testifies about the reality of
quantum entanglement when he says:

       When two systems of which we know the states by their
       respective representatives [wave functions], enter into
       temporary physical interaction due to known forces between
       them, and when after a time of mutual influence the systems
       separate again, then they can no longer be described in the
       same way as before, viz, by endowing each with a
       representative of its own. . . . By the interaction the two
       representatives have become entangled.209
     Great physicists believe that quantum entanglement represents an
essential characteristic of the subatomic world. According to particle
physicists like David Bohm, non-locality is not to be understood merely as
an entanglement between systems of two paired quantum particles. Rather,
it has to be envisaged at a much deeper level, and broader context. That is
to say, quantum entanglement/non-locality opens up a fundamental
dimension in the fabric of quantum reality. Herbert observes:

       What Bell's theorem does do for the quantum reality question
       is to clearly specify one of deep reality's necessary features:
       whatever reality may be, it must be non-local. Since Clauser's
       [and also Aspect's] experimental verification of Bell's theorem,
       we know that any correct model of reality has to incorporate
       explicitly non-local connections. No local reality can explain
       the type of world we live in.210

Schrödinger ascribes so much importance to quantum entanglement that he
calls it “THE characteristic trait of quantum mechanics, the one that
enforces its entire departure from classical ideas of thought.”211 Likewise,
Capra points out: “These nonlocal connections are seen by some physicists
as the very essence of quantum reality.”212 Smolin voices a similar opinion:
“The results of the experiment performed by Aspect and his colleagues
demonstrated that locality is not a principle that is respected by nature.
This means that the entangled nature of the quantum state reflects
something essential in the world.”213

     Now, what are these essential dimensions of the quantum world that
quantum entanglement discloses? First and foremost, it reveals the
wholeness of correlated particle systems. Smolin says: “Quantum theory
says quite generally that whenever two systems have interacted, their
description is tied together in this way no matter how far apart they may be.
This is called the wholeness or the entanglement of the quantum
description.”214 Polkinghorne speaks in a similar vein: “Quantum states
exhibit a surprisingly integrationist view of the relationship of systems
which have once interacted with each other, however widely they may
subsequently separate.”215 This means that an entangled system of
subatomic particles constitutes, and behaves as, one integrated whole.
Hence, the designations, ‘quantum wholeness' and ‘holism' (alternately
spelled ‘wholism') are employed to refer to such systems. These usages
mean that nonlocal influences render correlated multi-particle systems
holistic, that is, organize them into wholes. “Even physicists like Planck
and Einstein, who were greatly discomforted by the prospect of quantum
non-locality, completely understood and embraced holism as an
inescapable condition of our physical existence.”216 However, such holism
is different from the kind of wholeness implied in Newtonian mechanics.
Herbert explains the difference between the two:

       Quantum wholeness is no mere replay of the old so that
       everything is connected to everything else, no twentieth-
       century echo, for instance, of Newton's insight that gravity
       links each particle to every other. . . . Quantum wholeness, on
       the other hand, is a fundamentally new kind of togetherness,
       undiminished by spatial and temporal separation. No casual
       hookup, this new quantum thing, but a true mingling of distant
       beings that reaches across the galaxy as forcefully as it reaches
       across the garden.217

     Moreover, quantum entanglement discloses another essential
characteristic of the quantum world, namely, its inter-connectedness. This
means that the whole which quantum entanglement constitutes, is not made
up of isolated bits and pieces of matter. It does not consist of mere
additions of material particles externally related. Rather these particles are
all intimately related in such a way that their very existence consists in
their relationships with one another. Heisenberg affirms: “The world thus
appears as a complicated tissue of events, in which connections of different
kinds alternate or overlap or combine and thereby determine the texture of
the whole.”218 Zukav remarks about the inter-relations of parts implied by
Bell's theorem: “One of the implications of Bell's theorem is that, at a deep
and fundamental level, the ‘separate parts' of the universe are connected in
an intimate and immediate way.”219 According to Stapp, a particle itself is
constituted by such relationships: “An elementary particle is not an
independently existing unanalyzable entity. It is, in essence, a set of
relationships that reach outward to other things.”220

     Furthermore, such inter-relatedness of particles refers back to
quantum wholeness. The universe itself is believed to be a whole of
interacting relationships. Davies and Gribbin argue:

       We can think of the Universe as a vast network of interacting
       particles, and each linkage binds the participating particles into
       a single quantum system. In some sense the entire Universe
       can be regarded as a single quantum system. Although in
       practice the complexity of the cosmos is too great for us to
       notice this subtle connectivity except in special experiments
       like those devised by Aspect, nevertheless there is a strong
       holistic flavour to the quantum description of the Universe.221

Kafatos and Nadeau share a similar view:

       Since all quanta that interact with one another in a single
       quantum state remain in some sense a part of a ‘single' system,
       this suggests that a universe in which quanta are entangled at
       every level is and remains a single quantum whole. As
       physicists David Bohm and Bernard d'Espagnat suggest, non-
       locality appears to have been an inherent property of the
       universe throughout its history. 222

Indeed, quantum entanglement discloses the essential properties of the
universe - its inter-connectedness and holistic character; it is an inter-
related whole.

     Instances of quantum entanglement abound in the quantum world.
Consider for example, the jump of an electron from one atomic orbit to
another or the decay of a subatomic particle; these may occur without any
single event causing it. We can never foretell when and how such
phenomena will occur; we can only predict the probability of their
happening. This does not mean that atomic events take place in a
completely arbitrary manner; rather it implies that they are not caused by
local influences. It further indicates that the behaviour of any part is
determined by its non-local connections to the whole system. Physicists do
not know these connections precisely, and so they replace the classical
notion of cause and effect with the wider concept of statistical causality.
Hence, according to quantum theory, individual events do not always have
well-defined causes. For, the laws of quantum mechanics are statistical
laws which state that the probabilities of subatomic events are determined
by the dynamics of the whole system. But in the everyday macroscopic
world, nonlocal connections are relatively unimportant, and so we can
speak of separate objects and formulate laws describing their behaviour in
terms of certain causes. Capra aptly states: “But as we go to smaller
dimensions, the influence of nonlocal connections becomes stronger, the
certainties give way to probabilities, and it becomes more and more
difficult to separate any part of the universe from the whole.”223

     However, there is a problem regarding such a conception of
wholeness: that we do not have a holistic experience or knowledge of
things around us; we are not aware of them as wholes. Rather, we find that
things of our everyday life are not intrinsically related wholes although
they may be externally connected. Then, how are we to think of these
unrelated things as wholes? Niels Bohr answers: “Isolated material
particles are abstractions, their properties being definable and observable
only through their interaction with other systems.”224 This means that we
ordinarily think of physical objects and particles by isolating and
abstracting them from the whole of which they are parts. However, as
Bohm and Hiley suggest: “Rather, we say that inseparable quantum
interconnectedness of the whole universe is the fundamental reality, and
that relatively independently behaving parts are merely particular and
contingent forms within this whole.”225 Kafatos and Nadeau go so far as to
say that unrelated, individual objects are mere illusions: “Holism in this
new sense means that the universe on the most fundamental level is an
undissectable whole, and that discreteness of objects must be, in some
sense, a macro-level illusion.”226 Quantum entanglement thus demonstrates
that we cannot decompose the world into independently existing smallest
units, as in classical, Newtonian physics. Bohm and Hiley think that
quantum physics accomplishes a reversal of the classical view regarding
the relation between parts and the whole. They argue:

       One is led to a new notion of unbroken wholeness which denies
       the classical idea of analyzability of the world into separately
       and independently existing parts. . . . We have reversed the
       usual classical notion that the independent ‘elementary parts'
       of the world are the fundamental reality, and that the various
       systems are merely particular contingent forms and
       arrangements of these parts.227

Thus, the phenomenon of quantum entanglement shows that the universe is
not merely a collection of independent physical objects and particles, but
rather an intricate web of relations between the various parts of a unified
whole.

      Nevertheless, there is a basic limitation to the concept of wholeness
implied in quantum entanglement. In a sense, it is abstract and intangible.
This is in fact another aspect of the problem regarding wholeness we have
just discussed. Kafatos and Nadeau spell out:

       Although results of experiments testing Bell's theorem ‘infer'
       wholeness in so far as they show that the conditions for these
       experiments ‘imply' the existence of an unanalyzable and
       undissectable whole, the abstract theory that helps us to
       coordinate the concrete results cannot ‘in principle' disclose
       this wholeness. Since the abstract theory can deal only in
       complementary aspects of the complete reality disclosed in the
       act of measurement, that reality is not itself, in fact or in
       principle, disclosed. . . . The distinction we are trying to make
       here is, in our view, a critical one. On the one hand, nonlocality
       as a fact of nature clearly ‘infers' that wholeness is a
       fundamental aspect of nature. Yet, very importantly, neither
       theory nor experiment can ‘disclose' and, thereby, ‘prove' the
       existence of this indivisible and undissectable whole.228
This is in contrast to the classical scenario. According to classical physics,
the nature of the whole can be inferred from the analysis of its parts.
Kafatos and Nadeau refer to a reversal of positions from classical
mechanics to quantum physics:

       That belief [the classical belief in locality] allowed one to
       assume that the whole could be described as the sum of its
       parts, and thus the ultimate extension of theory in the
       description of all the parts would ‘be' the whole. To put it
       differently, it was presumed that reductionism was valid, and,
       therefore, that one could analyze the whole into parts and
       deduce the nature of the whole from its parts. With the
       discovery of non-locality that picture is reversed; it is the
       whole which discloses ultimately the identity of the parts.229

      All the same, the fact remains that quantum entanglement co-exists
with local influences among elementary particles and physical objects, and
that these influences can only be transferred locally. It is also true that it is
impossible for energy to be transferred, or information to be
communicated, faster than light as presumed in EPR paradox.
Consequently, one cannot actually use quantum entanglement to transport
energy or to transmit information. Nevertheless, the situation is very
surprising. Once two or more quantum particles have interacted, we cannot
separate any description of the properties of the one from the properties of
the other. Smolin points out the extent of the influence of quantum
entanglement: “Given any one electron, its properties are entangled with
those of every particle it has interacted with, from the moment of its
creation, indeed quite possibly from the moment of the creation of our
universe.”230

     We conclude with a quote from Kafatos and Nadeau about the
profound impact of non-locality/quantum entanglement on our ordinary
understanding of reality:

       But no previous discovery has posed more challenges to our
       sense of everyday reality than the discovery that non-locality is
       a fact of nature. Non-locality is a shocking discovery because it
       appears to subvert the bias that the world is composed most
       fundamentally of individual objects and their non-relational
       properties.231

2.5.4. Quantum Reality as Potentiality

     Indeed, the strange, weird concepts of quantum mechanics, like wave-
particle duality, uncertainty principle, wave function and non-locality, have
left great physicists like Einstein, Bohr and Heisenberg in two opposite
camps regarding the nature of quantum reality. Many other scientists as
well as ordinary mortals like us are aghast, and are in a state of utter
confusion and consternation. The Copenhagenists, we saw, apparently hold
on to a sort of skepticism (or idealism?) about the knowledge of the
subatomic world. However, the EPR view does not go so far, but affirms
only that quantum mechanics is an incomplete theory because it does not
provide us an objective knowledge of quantum reality. Einstein and his
team defended robust realism in quantum physics; that is, it has to give us a
comprehension of the quantum world. In other words, it must provide us
knowledge of microworld as it is in itself. Bell's theorem which affirms
non-locality of particles sheds some light on the reality of the subatomic
world. “Those who would deny any deep reality were put on the defensive
by the proof of Bell's theorem, however, so that most now do affirm an
objective reality on a global scale, distinct though not separate from the
cognizing observer.”232

     In the present context, we attempt at an understanding of the nature of
quantum reality by reflecting on the notion of wave function. Let us recall
our narrative on this concept.233 It is the foundational postulate in quantum
theory. It describes physical reality at the most fundamental level. The
wave function is a complete description of physical reality at that level.
Quantum physics teaches that every physical entity has a wave function
associated with it. It describes all the possibilities of a quantum object
before it interacts with an observing system. The wave function does not
signify any actual state of a particle, but a superposition of all its possible
states, like its character of wave-particle duality, and properties, such as
position and momentum, energy and time and so on.
       In between acts of measurement a quantum mechanical system
       is represented by a smoothly evolving wave function, which is
       an expression of potentiality (that is to say, it contains within
       itself the possibility of various outcomes), rather than the
       specification of actuality (which would imply a precise and
       pictureable representation of where the system is and what it is
       doing).234

      Thus, wave function describes the potentialities of a quantum object.
It is not directly related to the actualities of the system. We can speak about
the actuality of wave function only in the context of measuring/observing
the system. That is to say, according to the Copenhagen interpretation,
when a subatomic particle is observed, its wave function collapses, and one
of its possibilities/potentialities achieves actuality.235

     These reflections on wave function throw some light on the nature of
quantum reality. It is all about possibilities and potentialities. Wave
function does not represent any actual state of quantum reality, but it
describes the superposition of all its possibilities. Reputed scientists have
supported this view. David Bohm has this to say:

       This wave function is not directly related to the actual
       properties of an individual object, event, or process. Rather, it
       has to be thought of as a description of the potentialities within
       the physical situation. Different and generally mutually
       incompatible potentialities (e.g., for wavelike or particle-like
       behaviour) are actualized in different experimental
       arrangements (so that the wave-particle duality can be
       understood as one of the main forms for the expression of such
       incompatible potentialities).236

Zukav expresses it differently: “The wave function, according to this view,
is not quite a thing yet it is more than an idea. It occupies that strange
middle ground between idea and reality, where all things are possible, but
none are actual. Heisenberg likened it to Aristotle's potentia.”237 Thus in
quantum physics, the wave function serves as the matrix of all potentiality.
      The great physicist Heisenberg is a staunch proponent of this view.
Polkinghorne comments: “Heisenberg encouraged the thought of the
wavefunction as being the carrier of potentiality (the superposition of a
variety of outcomes) in contrast to its representing the instantiation of a
definite state of affairs.”238 Heisenberg has expressed this position umpteen
times in different contexts. He clearly states: “In the experiments about
atomic events we have to do with things and facts, with phenomena that are
just as real as any phenomena in daily life. But the atoms or the elementary
particles themselves are not as real; they form a world of potentialities or
possibilities rather than one of things or facts.”239 Heisenberg cautioned
that “the properties of quantum systems are real, but only as potentialities,
until measurement actualized them.”240 According to him, “unmeasured
quantum attributes are just, what they are, objective though unrealized
possibilities.”241 Polkinghorne remarks: “Heisenberg believed that quantum
entities do not possess precise positions and momenta but only
potentialities for these properties, which then only become actual when this
is forced by an act of measurement.”242 Referring to the central role
accorded to potentiality in quantum physics, Heisenberg says that it is
indeed “the restoration of the concept of potentiality.”243 He explains the
meaning of potentiality: “It meant a tendency for something. It was a
quantitative version of the old concept of ‘potentia' in Aristotelian
philosophy.”244 In the middle ages the idea of potentiality referred to the
tendency of an entity to develop in a particular way. Heisenberg does not
accept such an Aristotelian interpretation of potentiality as a striving to
attain a future purpose, but he does suggest that the possibilities described
by wave function refer to tendencies in nature.

      Now, all these views are in stark contrast with classical positions.
Classical physics, both Newtonian mechanics and Einstein's theory of
relativity, do not deal with merely possible objects, but with actual entities.
These systems are concerned with actually existing/ moving physical
objects which occupy definite space at a definite time. Potentiality has no
important role to play in classical systems. According to Bohm, classical
physics “has no place in it to give the notion of potentiality such a
fundamental role.”245 Quantum physics replaces actual entities of classical
physics with possible objects. Polkinghorne opines:
       In contrast to the mechanistic view and also our common
       sense, according to quantum theory, material reality does not
       exist with certainty at definite places, with definite velocity,
       but it manifests itself as ‘tendencies to exist'; and atomic
       events do not occur with certainty at definite times and in
       definite ways, but rather show ‘tendencies to occur.' These
       tendencies are expressed as probabilities; they are not ‘real'
       three dimensional objects.246

Capra interprets the concept of potentialities as ‘tendencies to exist' in
terms of probabilities: “In the formalism of quantum theory, these
tendencies [to occur] are expressed as probabilities and are associated with
mathematical quantities which take the form of waves.”247 Thus, according
to quantum mechanics, at the fundamental level, physical reality has to be
thought of as potentialities, not as actualities. Wave function which
describes the state of quantum objects represents an ocean of possibilities
or potentialities; and these are interpreted as tendencies to occur.

      We conclude the present chapter, “An Overview of Quantum Physics”
with an excellent quotation from the renowned American philosopher and
psychologist William James on the status of potentiality or possibility in
relation to actuality in the totality of reality:

       It [quantum indeterminism] admits that possibilities may be in
       excess of actualities, and that things not yet revealed to our
       knowledge may really be ambiguous. Of two alternative
       futures which we conceive, both may now be really possible;
       and the one becomes impossible only at the very moment when
       the other excludes it by becoming real itself. Indeterminism
       thus denies the world to be one unbending unit and fact. . . . To
       that view, actualities seem to float in a wider sea of
       possibilities from out of which they are chosen; and,
       somewhere, indeterminism says, such possibilities exist, and
       form a part of truth. Determinism, on the contrary, says they
       exist nowhere, and that necessity on the one hand and
       impossibility on the other are the sole categories of the real.
       Possibilities that fail to be realized are, for determinism, pure
       illusions: they never were possibilities at all. There is nothing
       inchoate, it says about the universe of ours, all that was or is or
       shall be actual in it having been from eternity virtually there.
       248



Indeed, the quantum physics confers priority to potentiality over actuality
in contrast to classical mechanics which accords predominance to actuality
rather than to potentiality.
                        3
            THE QUANTUM FIELD THEORIES
       We may therefore regard matter as being constituted by the
       regions of space in which the field is extremely intense. . . .
       There is no place in this new kind of physics both for the field
       and matter, for the field is the only reality.

              –Albert Einstein, Quoted by Louis de Broglie,
                Nouvelles Perspectives en Microphysique

      The conceptual framework of quantum mechanics we have outlined
in the previous chapter is in fact incomplete just because it does not
incorporate one of the most important concepts of physics, namely,
gravitation. Contrariwise, Einstein's general theory of relativity which is a
theory of gravitation is also incomplete since it does not integrate the
domains of quantum world. Thus, the two great systems of contemporary
physics are unfinished for opposite reasons. Though these theories are
separately applicable to different realms of physical reality, each cannot be
individually applied to the totality of physical existence. In contrast, the
past systems of physics were complete and comprehensive. For instance,
Newton's mechanics was a complete theory in so far as it had explanation
for the whole range of physical reality. Newtonian theory was overthrown
and was replaced, not by one new theory, but by two, namely, the theory of
relativity and quantum physics; and both of these theories are in fact
incomplete. Hence, the revolution which began with the inventions of the
theory of relativity and quantum physics would be complete only with
their unification into a single theory that would give us a comprehensive
picture of the whole range of physical reality. Such is the rationale for
quantum field theories which endeavour to unify the theory of relativity
and quantum mechanics.

3.1. Towards Quantum Field Theories
     As an initial attempt at incorporating the two great systems of
physics, quantum physicists have invented a mathematical framework
called ‘relativistic quantum field theory.' This theory tries to integrate the
special theory of relativity with quantum physics. The fundamental
concept in quantum field theory is ‘field' itself. Although ‘field' is an old
concept in physics, it has undergone radical transformations at the hands
of great physicists; they have invented the idea of ‘quantum field.' This
field is supposedly the ‘mother' of all particles.

3.1.1. The Unification of Relativity and Quantum Theory

      The theory of relativity and quantum mechanics provide the basic
conceptual frameworks for investigating and comprehending physical
reality at the biggest and smallest dimensions.1 The general theory of
relativity investigates the megacosm, that is, regions of the universe which
are both gigantic in size and mass, like clusters of galaxies, galaxies and
different types of stars. It describes the largescale structures and behaviour
of the universe on scales as large as 93 billion light years which is
supposedly the diameter of the observable universe. The general theory is
employed in astronomy and cosmology with great success, even to explain
the origin of the universe. Quantum mechanics, on the other hand, deals
with the microcosm, that is, the domains of the universe, which are both
extremely small in size and mass, such as atoms and subatomic particles.
It explains the structure and behaviour of these quantum objects at
exceedingly minute scales, as small as one millionth of a millionth of
centimeter. Quantum theory has been extremely successful in the
prediction of quantum phenomena, and also applications in technology.
Thus, the general theory of relativity and quantum mechanics are
thoroughly proven to be unbeatable in their respective fields of
application. In the two extremely different dimensions of the universe,
namely, the biggest and the smallest, these theories are valid and are very
successful. Since the two theories are applicable to very different domains,
most situations require that only one of them be employed.

     However, there are dimensions of physical reality, such as Big Bang
regime and Planck magnitudes (Planck time of 10-43 sec, Planck length of
10-33 cm and Planck density of 1094 gm/cc), where the combined
application of both the theory of relativity and quantum mechanics is
called for. These are domains of space-time which are extremely minute,
yet with incredible gravity; the curvature of space-time would be
enormous, and quantum effects dominate the structure of space-time.
Hence, for a proper comprehension of physical reality at the Planck scales,
the simultaneous application of the general theory of relativity and
quantum mechanics is required. Unfortunately, these two theories are
inconsistent with each other. Nobel Laureate Steven Weinberg aptly says:

       Quantum mechanics without relativity would allow us to
       conceive of a great many possible physical systems. . . .
       However, when you put quantum mechanics together with
       relativity, you find that it is nearly impossible to conceive of
       any possible physical system at all. Nature somehow manages
       to be both relativistic and quantum-mechanical; but these two
       requirements restrict it so much that it has only a limited
       choice of how to be — hopefully a very limited choice.2

      In particular, the general theory of relativity and quantum mechanics
are apparently incompatible. The main difficulty is that the general theory
is a ‘classical' theory; that is to say, it describes a universe that is causally
determined. By contrast, at the heart of quantum physics lies Heisenberg's
uncertainty principle, that is, radical indeterminism. Greene says: “On
ultramicroscopic scales, the central feature of quantum mechanics — the
uncertainty principle — is in direct conflict with the central feature of
general relativity — the smooth geometrical model of space (and of
spacetime).”3 But without a unification of these two great theories of
physics, our knowledge of the universe would remain fragmentary. Greene
continues:

       And surely, regardless of how central this incompatibility is to
       their own research, most physicists find it hard to believe that,
       at rock bottom, our deepest theoretical understanding of the
       universe will be composed of a mathematically inconsistent
       patchwork of two powerful yet conflicting explanatory
       frameworks.4

     But the difficulty is, how to accomplish such unification between
these two great theories. Pagels says: “The problem is how to modify this
theory [general theory] in some way so that one does not lose the
successful predictions of large-scale gravity while at the same time
resolving the puzzles of short-distance quantum gravity and unifying
gravity with the other forces of nature.”5 In spite of the hard work of some
of the world's greatest physicists, the general theory and quantum physics
stubbornly resist to be integrated, but continue to co-exist in incompatible
ways. However, these two systems of physics have to be unified in order to
achieve a complete knowledge of the universe. Hawking tells us: “Now, if
you believe that the universe is not arbitrary, but is governed by definite
laws, you ultimately have to combine the partial theories into a complete
unified theory that will describe everything in the universe.”6 As an initial
attempt at such a unification of the two systems, physicists have invented
a highly mathematical framework called ‘relativistic quantum field
theory.' This theory endeavours to unify the special theory of relativity and
quantum physics. Smolin observes: “And because Einstein's special theory
of relativity is the right setting for electromagnetism, these theories can
also be seen as unifications of quantum theory with special relativity.”7

      Quantum physicists have found that the concept of field provides the
key to the unification of the theory of relativity and quantum mechanics.
The idea of field was proposed by James Clerk Maxwell in his theory of
electromagnetism, and by Einstein in his theory of relativity. Maxwell
invented equations describing electric and magnetic fields; and he also put
forward some ideas about field. However, Maxwell was ambivalent as to
whether the electric and magnetic fields needed the medium of ‘ether' that
was believed to pervade all space. But Einstein in his 1905 paper on the
special theory of relativity showed that ether was a superfluous concept.
Electromagnetic fields require no medium in which they propagate, and in
this sense fields are fundamental and irreducible entities. Major steps
towards the synthesis of quantum theory and the special theory of
relativity were taken by Max Born, Heisenberg, Pascual Jordan in the
years 1926-28, and by Eugene Wigner and Wolfgang Pauli in 1929-30.
Paul Dirac made important contributions towards the development of
quantum field theory in the 1930s. These physicists showed that each
different field, such as the electromagnetic field and gravitational field,
has an associated particle. Fields are the fundamental entities which are
manifested as particles. This is the basic idea of quantum field theory
which banished forever the old idea that particles and fields are separate
entities. According to quantum field theories, the universe is a vast arena
of interacting fields manifested as quantum particles interacting with each
other.

     Quantum field theories interpret the four fundamental forces of
nature (gravitational, electromagnetic, strong nuclear and weak nuclear
forces) as particle interactions mediated by virtual particles called ‘gauge
bosons' which are ‘exchange particles' or ‘forcecarriers.' Each of these
four interactions has an associated exchange particle. Thus, the gauge
boson associated with electromagnetic interaction is photon; the
electromagnetic interaction between two charged particles is mediated by
the exchange of photons. It is the first of such quantum field theories,
called ‘quantum electrodynamics' (QED). Then there is the electroweak
theory which is the unification of electromagnetism and weak interaction.
theory of strong nuclear interaction is called ‘quantum chromodynamics'
(QCD). Gravitational interaction does not enter into the picture for reasons
which will be explained later.8 Relativistic quantum field theories
represent the culmination of decades of scientific research, and so far they
have produced remarkable results. The fundamental laws of these theories
were in place by the 1930s. Some of their basic tenets have been
challenged, but never overthrown.9

3.1.2. The Quantum Field

    In the broadest sense of the term, field can be identified with space;
in this sense, field is where something exists, and through which
something moves. In general, field is something that exists throughout
space and time, as opposed to a particle that exists at only one point in
space at a time. “A field is something that exists at each point of space.”10
From a macroscopic perspective, it is the medium by which a force
communicates its influence. In the context of quantum field theories, field
refers to the influence of some unseen agent, considered as existing at all
points in space and exerting a force on objects placed at any point in
space. “Fields are nonmaterial regions of influence.”11 Electrical field,
gravitational field and magnetic field are some examples of fields in this
sense. Iron filings align themselves under magnetic field, like a herd of
sheep group themselves hearing the voice of a shepherd. Thus, field is the
means by which a force communicates its influence. It is the medium of
‘action-at-a-distance;' physical objects can affect each other through fields
even though they are not in physical contact. Fields are often contrasted
with material particles and their composites. Whereas these objects are
localized in some definite region of space, fields are considered to be
continuously distributed throughout space as a whole. A field, like a wave,
is spread out over a much larger area than a particle; in contrast, a particle
is restricted to one small region in space. Moreover, a field completely
fills a given space. Fields are known through their physical effects, even
though they cannot be usually detected directly by our senses.

     The most familiar examples of fields are gravitational and
electromagnetic fields which make their effects felt in our everyday life.
They are invisible, but they produce physical objects. The Earth's
gravitational field is all around us. We cannot perceive it; in that sense it is
not a material object, but it is nevertheless real. The gravitational field of
the Earth causes things to fall down to the ground. It is holding us down to
the Earth at this moment; without it we would be floating. The Moon
orbits the Earth because the Earth's gravitational field interacts with that
of the Moon. Massive bodies produce gravitational fields, that is, space-
time curvature, in the language of the general of theory relativity. Another
familiar field is electromagnetic field. In contrast to gravitational field,
electromagnetic fields are felt only by charged particles, and they give rise
to both attraction and repulsion among them. Electromagnetic fields are
integral to the organization of all material systems, such as atoms,
molecules and bigger physical objects, both organic and inorganic. All
around us there are countless electromagnetic fields which cannot be
perceived by our senses. The spatial structure of the field around an iron
magnet, for instance, is invisible in itself, but its effects are felt by
sprinkling iron filings around it. The electromagnetic field, like
gravitational field, is continuous, and unlike a material object, it cannot be
cut up into separate parts. If a magnet is cut into half, each half does not
merely possess half of the original field, abruptly ending where the
magnet is cut; rather, each piece becomes a whole magnet surrounded by a
complete magnetic field.

     The story of the concept of field in modern physics is fascinating
indeed. It starts with Newton's notion of field -- the gravitational field.
According to his mechanics, motions of physical objects are caused by the
force of gravity of these objects themselves. In this view, there is no
continuous field of gravity spread throughout space between objects.
Space is empty, and across this empty space, gravity influences
neighbouring objects as ‘action-at-a-distance.' The force of gravity is
transmitted instantaneously from one body to another. Thus in Newtonian
mechanics, mass or material body is separate from gravitational field. In
this view, fields and objects are completely independent of each other.
Gravitational field is believed to be produced in some unexplained way by
physical objects acting at a distance causing these objects to attract each
other. Newton thought of gravitation as a hidden force for which he had no
explanation.

     Modern field theories have transformed Newton's concept of
gravitational field profoundly resulting in a new idea of field, by the same
token changing also his notion of particle or physical object. Two such
archetypal concepts of fields are James Maxwell's electromagnetic field
and Einstein's metric field of gravitation to which we have already
referred. Philosopher Errol Harris summarizes the transformations of the
concept of field brought about by the electromagnetic theory of Maxwell
and Einstein's theory of relativity:

       The theory of relativity gave precedence to the concept of the
       field over that of the particle. This development also had been
       anticipated in the nineteenth century by the theory of
       electrodynamics due to J. Clerk Maxwell. The
       electromagnetic field in principle fills the whole of space, and
       in accordance with the general theory of relativity, space-time
       itself is regarded as the metrical field from which the
       measured quantities are inseparable, and in which the
       elements that have them are inextricably embedded. Energy
       and mass thus become degrees of curvature in space-time, and
       matter, having been equated with energy in Einstein's equation
       ‘E = mc2' is a singularity in space-time.12

     The modern concept of field was first invoked in physics by Michael
Faraday and James Maxwell in the nineteenth century in their
electromagnetic theory. In the 1840s, Faraday initially proposed an idea
similar to field, namely, ‘lines of force' as the means by which a force is
transmitted across space. In his investigations of electrical phenomena, he
employed this concept of ‘lines of force' around a charged particle in order
to explain how electrical force could be communicated through empty
space from one body to another. Harris explains: “A charged particle or a
magnet is surrounded by a configuration of lines of force along which a
free body subject to electrical or magnetic forces will be accelerated in the
direction in which the force acts. This configuration is known as the field
of force of the particle or the magnet.”13 The lines of force tend to pull
opposite charges together, and keep apart similarly charged particles.
Maxwell elaborated this concept into the first field theory in order to
describe electricity and magnetism. Central to Maxwell's theory was the
introduction of a profound and far-reaching new concept in physics -- the
field. Thus, Faraday and Maxwell replaced the classical concept of force
by that of field, and in doing so they went beyond Newtonian physics.
Instead of interpreting the interaction between positive and negative
electric charges as attraction/ repulsion between these two charges like the
gravitational attraction of two masses in Newtonian mechanics, Faraday
and Maxwell suggested that each charge creates a ‘disturbance' or a
‘condition' in the space around it; and the other charge, when it is present,
‘feels' a force. This condition in space is what is called a field. It is created
by a single charge, and it exists whether or not another charge is brought
in to feel its effect. This idea of field was the most profound
transformation in the conception of physical reality since the time of
classical physics. Thus, Faraday and Maxwell replaced the concept of
force like electromagnetic force by the much subtler notion of field.

     Maxwell thought of charged particles as being surrounded by their
electromagnetic fields like an invisible halo; their presence was quite
undetectable except when other charged particles were placed in their
fields. The action of the field was to exert a force upon charged particles.
Maxwell thus employed the concept of field for describing the forces
between electric charges. Electric fields are created by charged bodies and
their effects can only be felt by other charged bodies. An electric field
then is a condition in the space around a charged body, which produces a
force on other charged bodies in that space. When electric charges are set
in motion, they produce magnetic fields; that is, an electric current creates
a magnetic field. Conversely, a moving magnetic field generates electrical
forces, and produces a current flow if there is a circuit. Evidently, electric
and magnetic fields are not independent entities and are not separate.
Maxwell realized that these discoveries pointed to a unification of
electricity and magnetism. To fully unify them, he had to change his
equations. He did so simply by adding one term, and this unification
became the model for further unifications of other fields. Maxwell
combined together the results of experimental work already carried out by
Faraday and other physicists into a unified set of mathematical equations,
known as Maxwell's equations; these equations beautifully and correctly
described the interplay between the motion of charged particles and the
behaviour of electromagnetic field. Field was believed to be the means by
which electromagnetic forces were transmitted across space. The new
equations allowed electric and magnetic fields to turn into each other.

     Another classical field theory is Einstein's theory of relativity, in
particular, the general theory of relativity proposed in 1916. The general
theory is first and foremost a field theory. As we know, Einstein started his
project of unification with the concept of space-time in the special theory
of relativity; space is unified with time. However, in the special theory,
space-time and mass/energy remain separate entities. If all mass/energy in
the universe were removed, absolute space-time would remain as empty
background. Hence, space-time had to be unified with mass/energy.
Einstein accomplished this feat in his general theory of relativity which is
primarily a theory of gravity. According to Newton, gravitation is a force
of attraction between bodies acting at a distance. But in the general theory,
gravitation is neither a force nor an attraction; it is the ‘warping' or
‘curvature' of space-time in the presence of mass/energy. “Again, the
space around the object is ‘conditioned' in such a way that another object
will feel a force, but this time the conditioning affects the geometry, and
thus the very structure of space.”14 Gravitation is a geometrical property of
space-time. That is to say, the geometry of space-time is determined by the
distribution of mass/energy. Thus, the general theory equated gravitational
field with space-time curvature in the presence of matter. They are not
separate. Capra explains:

       Wherever there is a massive body, there will also be a
       gravitational field, and this field will manifest itself as the
       curvature of the space surrounding that body. We must not
       think, however, that the field fills the space and ‘curves' it.
       The two cannot be distinguished; the field is the curved space!
       In general relativity, the gravitational field and the structure
       — or geometry — of space are identical. They are represented
       in Einstein's field equations by one and the same
       mathematical quantity. In Einstein's theory, then, matter
       cannot be separated from its field of gravity, and the field of
       gravity cannot be separated from the curved space. Matter and
       space are thus seen to be inseparable and interdependent parts
       of a single whole.15

     Likewise, philosopher Milton Munitz observes :

       Apart from the field, then, there is nothing, and contrary even
       to special relativity, not even ‘empty space.' In this sense the
       field in Einstein's view replaces as unitary conception both
       matter (whether ponderable or imponderable) and space. It
       emerges as the true absolute, being indeed not only
       independent of any other physical existence, but in fact all-
       embracing. On the other hand, ‘space' must be seen as
       embedded in, and as an aspect of, the total structure of the
       field.16

      According to Bohm, with the coming of Einstein's theory of relativity,
“the notion of separate and independent particles as basic constituents of
the universe has to be given up. The basic notion was the idea of the field
that spread continuously through space. Out of this you had to construct
the notion of a particle.”17 Bohm suggests the analogy of the flow of a
fluid (field) such as water. Within such a fluid, there may be a constant
recurrent pattern. A vortex (particle) may be a convenient word to describe
that pattern. As Bohm points out, Einstein “proposed a set of continuous
fields pervading all space, in which particles would be treated as relatively
stable and independent structures in limited regions in which the field was
strong. Therefore each particle is explained as an abstraction of a
relatively independent and stable form, as with the vortex, spread out
through space with no breaks anywhere.”18 Later in his career, Einstein
was in search of a unified field theory which would encompass the whole
universe. Bohm articulates Einstein's vision of unified field:

       Einstein did in fact very seriously try to obtain such a
       description in terms of a unified field theory. He took the total
       field of the whole universe as a primary description. This field
       is continuous and indivisible. Particles are then to be regarded
       as certain kinds of abstraction from the total field,
       corresponding to regions of very intense field (called
       singularities). As the distance from the singularity [particle]
       increases, . . . the field gets weaker, until it merges
       imperceptibly with the fields of other singularities. But
       nowhere is there a break or a division.19

     The quantum field then is seen as the fundamental physical entity; it
is a continuous medium which is present everywhere in space. The
quantum world and indeed the whole universe could be viewed as a vast
domain of interacting fields. These fields obey the principles of special
theory and of quantum mechanics. It is meaningless to ask what fields are
composed of. Physics cannot explain fields in terms of anything more
fundamental. The current view among particle physicists is that fields are
irreducible; that they are not composed of parts. They are the simplest
entities in the universe. Quantum fields are the primary entities in terms of
which particles and everything else are to be explained. Quantum field is
“a fundamental entity that can exist in continuous form, as a field, and in
discontinuous form, as particles, different kinds of particles being
associated with different fields.”20 Hence, there is a fundamental
difference between classical and quantum fields. Babu Joseph clarifies:
“There is a subtle distinction between classical and quantum fields; while
the classical field is simply a continuum without (virtual) particles, the
quantum field does have them in it.”21

     Now, it is pertinent to ask, how are we to characterize fields like
electromagnetic and gravitational fields? What is their nature, and what
are their properties? Polkinghorne defines field as follows: “A field is an
entity taking values at every point of space and instant of time, a truly
extended physical system.”22 Smolin articulates further the nature of field:

       The idea is that a field is a quantity, like a number, one of
       which lives at each point in space. As you move through
       space, the value of the field changes continuously. The value
       of the field at a single point also evolves in time. The [field]
       theory gives us laws that tell us how the field changes as you
       move in space and through time. These laws tell us that the
       value of the field at a particular point is influenced by the
       value of the field at nearby points. The field at a point can also
       be influenced by a material body at the same point. Thus, a
       field can carry a force from one body to another. There is no
       need to believe in ghostly action at a distance.23

     With Capra, we conclude that quantum field theories effect a radical
transformation of the concepts of both matter and space. He says:

       The field theories of modern physics force us to abandon the
       classical distinction between material particles and the void.
       Einstein's field theory of gravity and quantum field theory
       both show that particles cannot be separated from the space
       surrounding them. On the one hand, they determine the
       structure of that space, while on the other hand they cannot be
       regarded as isolated entities, but have to be seen as
       condensations of a continuous field which is present
       throughout space. In quantum field theory, this field is seen as
       the basis of all particles and of their mutual interactions. 24

3.1.3. Quantum Fields and Particles

     Now, what is the relation between fields and particles? We have
already made some references above about this relationship. Before the
advent of quantum field theories, there was an ultimate dualism in
classical physics between matter and space -- between particles and field -
- with primacy given to matter. This is evident from the classical
definition of matter: “Matter = full space.”25 Although Maxwell and
Einstein introduced the concept of field (electromagnetic and gravitational
fields respectively), they nevertheless did not accord primacy to field over
particles. Maxwell presupposed dualism between electromagnetic field
and particles like electrons. Even Einstein in his general theory
distinguished between space-time curvature (gravitational field) and
mass/energy. Obviously, he would not say that mass/energy is the product
of spacetime warpage. In this sense, dualism between fields and particles
persisted in the minds of physicists. But with the introduction of the
concept of quantum field, this dualism was abolished -- in the late 1920s.
Quantum field theories accomplished a radical paradigm shift which
replaced the notion of particles as fundamental entities by the much
subtler notion of quantum fields. Capra sums up this scientific revolution:

       The classical mechanistic world-view was based on the notion
       of solid, indestructible particles moving in the void. Modern
       physics has brought about a radical revision of this picture. It
       has led not only to a completely new notion of ‘particles,' but
       has also transformed the classical concept of the void in a
       profound way. This transformation took place in the so-called
       field theories. It began with Einstein's idea of associating the
       gravitational field with the geometry of space and became
       even more pronounced when quantum theory and relativity
       theory were combined to describe the force fields of
       subatomic particles. In these ‘quantum field theories,' the
       distinction between particles and the space surrounding them
       loses its original sharpness, and the void [field] is recognized
       as a dynamic quantity of paramount importance.26

Steven Weinberg narrates the historical development of the paradigm shift
from particles to quantum fields:

       However, the world was still conceived to be composed of two
       very different ingredients -- particles and fields -- which were
       both to be described in terms of quantum mechanics, but in
       very different ways. Material particles, like electrons and
       protons, were conceived to be eternal. . . . It was not long
       before a way was found out of this distasteful dualism, toward
       a truly unified view of nature. The essential steps were taken
       in a 1928 paper of Jordan and Eugene Wigner, and then in a
       pair of long papers in 1929-30 by Heisenberg and Pauli. They
       showed that material particles could be understood as the
       quanta of various fields, in just the same way as the photon is
       the quantum of the electromagnetic field. There was supposed
       to be one field for each type of elementary particle. Thus, the
       inhabitants of the universe were conceived to be a set of fields
       -- an electron field, a proton field, an electromagnetic field —
       and particles were reduced to mere epiphenomena. In its
       essentials, this point of view has survived to the present day,
       and forms the central dogma of quantum field theory: the
       essential reality is a set of fields subject to the rules of special
       relativity and quantum mechanics; all else is derived as a
       consequence of the quantum dynamics of these fields.27

    With the invention of the concept of quantum field then the dualism
between field and particle was abolished, and field was taken to be the
fundamental reality. Field is not to be considered external to particle, and
so there is no dualism between the two. Quantum field theories also
reconcile the dualism between wave and particle. Polkinghorne writes:

       One can see that [the reconciliation of apparent opposites]
       most clearly in the way in which quantum field theory
       provides the formalism perfectly adapted to a duality of wave
       and particle. Because it concerns a field, it has the property of
       extension in space that goes with wavelike behaviour; because
       it is quantized, its energy and momentum come in the
       countable and indivisible packets (quanta) that go with
       particle behaviour.28

Harris describes the scenario in particle physics that has come about with
the introduction of the concept of field as fundamental reality:

       As the field fills the whole of space and time, no part of the
       physical universe is completely unaffected by it . . . . The
       introduction of the concept, therefore, indicative of the
       crumbling of the classical mechanics, gives rise to a more
       unified picture of the material world, in which every particle
       becomes, in a sense, all-pervasive and each becomes involved
       with every other in a complex of overlapping fields. For every
       particle is the centre at least of a gravitational field and may
       also have electrical and magnetic fields associated with it, the
       limits of none of which can be sharply drawn and which
       modify the physical environment of every other particle.29

Quantum field theories thus interpret field as the foundation of all
particles and their mutual interactions. The field is the continuum which is
present always and everywhere; it is the medium of all material
phenomena. In the Aristotelian terminology, we can say that quantum field
is the ‘substance' of the universe, and particles are the ‘accidents,' but they
are not separate.

   According to quantum field theories, matter-particles are the
momentary manifestations of interacting fields which are the fundamental
entities in the universe. Particles are merely local condensations of the
field; they are concentrations of energy which appear and disappear,
thereby losing their individual character and dissolving into the underlying
field. The intensity of a field at a point tells us the probability of finding
its associated particle. For instance, the intensity of electromagnetic field
at a point in space gives us the odds for finding a photon there, and so
photons are the manifestations of electromagnetic fields. This idea has
been extended to describe all subatomic particles and their interactions,
each type of particle corresponding to a different kind of field. Thus, Paul
Dirac who contributed much to the development of quantum field theory,
visualized a separate field for each type of particle. During his time, only
three kinds of subatomic particles (electron, proton and neutron) were
discovered, and so only three different kinds of fields were postulated. A
photon is a particle of electromagnetic field, an electron is a quantum of
electron-positron field, and a proton is a particle of proton-anti-proton
field, and so on. Thus, the fundamental postulate of relativistic quantum
field theory is that physical reality consists of a set of fields that specifies
the probabilities for finding their associated particles. The idea of matter
thus disappeared into that of field.

      Great quantum physicists, like Einstein, Heisenberg, Eugene Wigner,
Wolfgang Pauli, Pascual Jordan and Paul Dirac, have held that material
particles could be understood as quanta of various fields. They have thus
supported the primacy of quantum field over particles. We have strong
endorsements from Einstein himself. He comments about the invention of
the quantum field theory: “It needed great scientific imagination to realize
that it is not the charges nor the particles but the field in the space between
the charges and the particles which is essential for the description of
physical phenomena.”30 Einstein rejects the dualism between field and
particles saying that, “there is no sense in regarding matter and field as
two qualities quite different from each other . . . field being the only
reality.”31 Further, he affirms the primacy of field over particle: “The
material particle has no place as a fundamental concept in field theory.
Even Maxwell's electrodynamics are [sic] not complete for this reason.
Gravity as a field theory must also deny a preferred status to matter.”32
Einstein goes so far as to say that field is the only reality: “We may
therefore regard matter as being constituted by the regions of space in
which the field is extremely intense. . . . There is no place in this new kind
of physics both for the field and matter, for the field is the only reality.”33

     Other renowned physicists also affirm the primacy of quantum field
over matter. Weinberg agrees with Einstein when he says that “the
essential reality is a set of fields. . . . all else can be derived as a
consequence of the quantum dynamics of those fields.”34 Smolin makes a
similar remark: “If fields are not made from matter, perhaps fields are the
fundamental stuff. Matter must then be made from fields.”35 Likewise,
Capek says: “The ultimate material reality that physics can apprehend is
the ‘field' and in the aspect of the quantum field, it is both a continuum
and a discontinuum, the discontinuities being temporary condensations of
space-time where the field is unusually intense, giving rise to corpuscular
matter.”36 Bohm expresses a similar opinion: “In a quantum field theory,
what we perceive as particles are excitations of the quantum field itself.”37
The great mathematician, Hermann Weyl comments about the relation
between electromagnetic field and electron: “According to the [field
theory of matter] a material particle such as an electron is merely a small
domain of the electrical field within which the field strength assumes
enormously high values, indicating that a comparatively huge field energy
is concentrated in a very small space.”38

     We conclude the present narrative with Peat's observation about
quantum field theory: “Quantum field theory is a deeper way of dealing
with quantum mechanical systems than the quantum theory of Heisenberg
and Schrödinger.”39

3.2. Quantum Fields and Particle Interactions

      Indeed, the concept of field holds the key to the construction of
quantum field theories — the unification of special and general theories of
relativity with quantum mechanics. These field theories give new
interpretations to the four fundamental forces of nature in terms of particle
interactions. Relativistic quantum field theories deal with electromagnetic,
weak nuclear and strong nuclear forces, and the proposed quantum theory
of gravity concerns gravitational force.

3.2.1. The Fundamental Forces as Particle Interactions

      In classical mechanics, forces between particles are described in
terms of pushing and pulling action. For instance, in the case of
electromagnetic force, two negatively charged electrons are said to repel
each other because they push each other apart. They supposedly exert a
repulsive force on one another. But according to quantum field theories,
this is a very imprecise way of describing electromagnetic force. Neither
of the two electrons ‘feels' any force when they approach each other.
Physicists now prefer to speak about particle interactions rather than about
forces. Force is understood as an exchange of ‘virtual' particles between
interacting charged particles, such as electrons or protons. Quantum field
theory thus replaces the concept of force by the subtler notion of
interaction; and all interactions take place through the exchange of virtual
particles.40 Photons are the mediating particles of electromagnetism, weak
bosons are the force-carriers of electroweak force and gluons are the
exchange particles of strong force. The theory of particle interactions was
worked out in the 1940s by three physicists, namely, Richard Feynman, J.
Schwinger and S. Tomonaga.

     The complex interactions among electrons and other particles are
thus mediated by sets of virtual particles or gauge bosons.41 These are not
as real as other subatomic particles. For instance, the virtual photon that
mediates electromagnetic interaction is not as real as the photon which is a
particle of light. That is why it is called ‘virtual' photon. It has the nature
of a real particle, but it does not actually exist as a particle. A virtual
particle is a ‘shadow' particle, and has an extremely short duration; but a
real particle, like a photon or an electron, has a long life. Unlike real
particles, virtual particles cannot be observed in a bubble chamber because
of their extremely short life, but their existence is inferred mathematically.
But they are not merely imaginary particles because they produce
measurable effects, and also because they can turn into real ones under
appropriate conditions. Prediction about their existence has been
confirmed by experiments to a high degree of accuracy. The composition
and properties of virtual particles determine the range and types of
different interactions between particles. For example, virtual photons are
considered massless, and so electromagnetic interactions can take place at
indefinite distances. On the other hand, the vector bosons W± and Zo,
virtual particles associated with weak nuclear force are massive, and so
they give rise to the short-ranged weak force. Thus according to quantum
field theory, every field, like electromagnetism, has an associated virtual
particle which determines the nature of the field.

     For instance, let us consider the gravitational force which is believed
to be the force of attraction between bodies with masses. Thus we say that
two massive bodies -- the Sun and the Earth -attract each other through
their gravitational fields. But according to quantum field theory, the
gravitational field between the Sun and the Earth is not to be considered as
a force field between them. Rather, such a force of attraction is the result
of the exchange of ‘gravitons' which are the virtual particles of
gravitational field; this field is supposedly ‘quantized' into countless
gravitons. Thus, the Sun and the Earth are all the time exchanging these
gravitons; and these exchanges make up the gravitational field between
these two massive bodies. Stephen Hawking explains: “The gravitational
force between the sun and the earth is ascribed to the exchange of
gravitons between the particles that make up these two bodies. Although
the exchanged particles are virtual, they certainly do produce a measurable
effect - they make the earth orbit the sun!”42 Herbert states it differently:
“Thus the sun attracts the Earth (and vice versa) via the gravity field or via
an exchange of gravitons (the particle aspect of the gravity field).”43
Another example is how the electromagnetic interaction takes place in a
hydrogen atom which has an electron and a proton. The classical
explanation is that these two particles are bound together by an electrical
field. But according to quantum field theory, the two particles - proton and
electron - are exchanging a third particle, namely, the virtual photon. We
might think of proton and electron as two tennis players hitting a ball - the
photon - back and forth between them. The exchange of ball binds two
players together; the photon acts as a kind of glue that holds two
components of hydrogen atom together.44
      We shall illustrate the dynamics of particle interactions by examining
electromagnetic force/interactions in some detail. Take for example, an
electrically charged particle ‘repelling' another with similar electric
charge - say, two electrons. According to classical physics, each particle is
surrounded by an electric field — a ‘cloud' or ‘mist' of ‘electric-essence'
— and the force each particle ‘feels' arises from the repulsion between
their respective force fields. However, quantum field theory interprets
such repulsion as an interaction between charged particles mediated by
virtual photons. We can think of an electromagnetic field as consisting of a
swarm of photons; the interaction between two charged particles actually
arises from their ‘shooting' photons back and forth between themselves,
like ice-skaters throwing bowling balls at each other. One skater can affect
the fellow ice-skater's motion and also one's own motion by hurling a
barrage of bowling balls at the other. Similarly, two electrically charged
particles influence each other by exchanging virtual photons. However, in
this example, the exchange of bowling balls is always repulsive; always it
drives the skaters apart. But when two oppositely charged particles
interact through the exchange of photons, the resulting electromagnetic
force can be also attractive. Greene suggests that in an electromagnetic
interaction, a charged particle is conveying a message to the other particle
through virtual photon rather than imparting a force:

       It's as if the photon is not so much the transmitter of the force
       per se, but rather the transmitter of a message of how the
       recipient must respond to the force in question. For like-
       charged particles, the photon carries the message ‘move
       apart,' while for oppositely charged particles it carries the
       message ‘come together.' For this reason the photon is
       sometimes referred to as the messenger particle for the
       electromagnetic force. Similarly, the gluons and weak gauge
       bosons are the messenger particles for the strong and weak
       nuclear forces.45

     Thus, according to quantum field theory (which in the present case is
called ‘quantum electrodynamics'), two electrons repel one another when
virtual photons pass back and forth between them. The first electron emits
a virtual photon which is absorbed by the second. As a result of emitting
photon, the first electron recoils in response, and its direction of motion is
partially deflected. The photon also gives a small ‘kick' to the second
electron as it is absorbed, with its direction of motion likewise deflected.
These recoil and kick send them onto diverging paths. The net result is
that the two electrons are pushed away from one another, and they fly
apart from each other. Thus, if two electrons come close enough to each
other -close enough so that their virtual photon clouds overlap -- a virtual
photon that is emitted by one electron is absorbed by the other. This is the
case of an electron interaction - one electron interacting with another. Of
course, this is a two-way process with both electrons absorbing virtual
photons that are emitted by the other. The closer two electrons come, the
more virtual photons they exchange, and the more virtual photons they
exchange, the more sharply their paths are deflected. This is how electrons
are said to be repelling each other. Physicists call this process ‘scattering.'
(See Figure 14)

      However, if a second electron (or another charged particle) is not
present, the virtual photons have nowhere to go but to return back to the
‘mother' electron and then they are absorbed by it. “When an electron
emits a virtual photon which is absorbed by another particle, the electron
is said to be ‘interacting' with another particle. However, when an electron
emits a virtual photon and then re-absorbs it, the electron is said to be
interacting with itself.”46 In this way, each electron acts on itself through
its own photon cloud. Such emitting and re-absorption of a virtual photon
by an electron is called ‘selfinteraction.' Hence, every electrically charged
particle continually emits and re-absorbs virtual photons, and/or
exchanges them with other charged particles. When two electrons (two
negative charges) exchange virtual photons, they ‘repel' each other. But if
a proton and an electron (a positive charge and a negative charge)
exchange virtual photons, they ‘attract' each other. The repulsive/attractive
force between these particles is simply the cumulative effect of the
exchanges of virtual photons; the number of these exchanges increases at
close range, and decreases with distance. Capra says: “The force is nothing
but the collective macroscopic effect of these multiple photon exchanges.
The concept of force is therefore no longer useful in subatomic physics. It
is a classical concept which we associate (even if only subconsciously)
with the Newtonian idea of a force being felt over a distance.”47 Hence,
according to quantum field theory, an electromagnetic force is in fact the
mutual exchange of virtual photons.




Figure 14. ‘Scattering' process of electromagnetic interaction
      Richard Feynman's space-time diagrams represent the notion of force
as exchange of particles. The diagram above shows the process of
exchanging a virtual photon; it represents the mutual repulsion of two
electrons by the exchanging of a virtual photon. One of them emits a
virtual photon at point A, and the other absorbs it at point B. When the
first electron emits the photon, it reverses its direction and changes its
velocity, and so does the second electron when it absorbs the photon. In the
end, the two electrons fly apart, having repelled each other through the
exchange of a virtual photon.

     Now, the question arises about the origin of virtual particles like
photons. How are they produced? Heisenberg's uncertainty principle and
quantum vacuum provide us the key to explain the creation of these
particles. As we have seen, although uncertainty principle is generally
stated in terms of position and momentum, it is also applied to the relation
between energy and time. If we know the energy of a particle exactly, then
we cannot predict with certainty the amount of time that it is likely to
remain in that state of energy. Conversely, if we know precisely the
duration of a particle in a state of energy, then we cannot predict with
precision its energy state. This relationship between energy and time has
important consequences. The uncertainty principle allows the violation of
the law of conservation of energy for an extremely short period of time. It
permits virtual particles to come into existence spontaneously from the
quantum vacuum for an exceedingly short time provided they disappear
within the time permitted by uncertainty principle. The extra energy for
creating these particles is ‘borrowed' from the quantum field (vacuum)
and it has to be ‘paid back' within the time limits stipulated by uncertainty
principle.48 This ‘borrowing' of energy and ‘paying it back' in the
interaction between two electrons, exchanging virtual particles (photons)
apparently have the following sequence: first, there are two electrons, then
one of them emits a virtual photon (borrowing energy), and the other
absorbs it (paying it back) within the time limits permitted by uncertainty
relation. If there is only one electron, then it emits a virtual photon
(borrowing energy), which is re-absorbed by the electron itself (paying it
back), within the stipulated time. This, we said above, is self-interaction.
Thus, the uncertainty relation between energy and time allows the emitting
and re-absorption of photons if it takes place within the limits of time
allowed by uncertainty principle -- that is, within about one thousand
trillionth (10-15) of a second. This explains the origin of virtual particles.

     A virtual particle like photon, we said, is a ‘shadow' particle, and is
not as real as the photon which is a particle of light. That is why it is
called ‘virtual' photon. It has the nature of a real photon, but it does not
actually exist as, nor have the reality of, a photon. Now the question is,
how does a virtual photon get promoted to the state of a real photon? The
answer is that if we provide the required energy for a virtual photon
without violating the conservation law of mass-energy, it would become a
real photon. Such a real photon is emitted by an excited electron. An
excited electron is an electron that is in an energy level higher than its
ground state. An electron's ground state is its lowest energy level where it
is as close to the nucleus of an atom as possible. The only photons which
electrons emit when they are in their ground state are virtual photons
which they re-absorb within the time permitted by uncertainty principle so
as not to violate the conservation law of mass-energy. An electron
considers the ground state as its ‘home.' It does not like to leave the home.
In fact, the only time it leaves its ground state is when it is literally pushed
out of it with extra energy supply. In that case, the electron's first concern
is to get back to its ground state. Since the ground state is a low-energy
state, the electron must lose its surplus energy before it can return to it.
Therefore, when the electron is at an energy level higher than its ground
state, it jettisons its excess energy in the form of a photon. The ejected
photon is one of the electron's virtual photons, that suddenly finds itself
with enough energy to become a real photon without violating the
conservation law of mass-energy. In other words, one of the electron's
virtual photons is suddenly ‘promoted' to be a real photon. The amount of
energy the promoted photon has, depends upon how much extra energy the
electron had to jettison.49

      We sum up our narrative on ‘Fundamental Forces as Particle
Interactions,' in the words of Paul Davies: “In this quantum description,
the existence of the electromagnetic interaction between two charged
particles is attributed to the exchange of another particle -- the photon.
The electromagnetic field of a charged particle may be envisaged as a
cloud of virtual photons surrounding the particle.”50 These remarks are
applicable to the other interactions of nature as well. To these, we now
turn.

3.2.2. The Four Basic Particle Interactions

     Quantum field theory, we saw, interprets the forces of nature as
particle interactions. There are four such fundamental forces, namely,
strong nuclear force, electromagnetism, gravity and weak nuclear force.
Of these, the first three are binding forces; the strong nuclear force holds
atomic nuclei together, the electromagnetic force binds atoms and
molecules, and the gravitational force holds planets, stars and galaxies.
The weak nuclear force does not bind anything, but manifests itself in
certain kinds of particle collisions and in particle decays, such as
radioactive decay. Before we explain these forces in terms of particle
interactions, it would be instructive to sum up how they are traditionally
understood.
      The most familiar fundamental force is gravity which is the force of
attraction between bodies that have masses. All phenomena of nature
described by physics are governed by gravity. This force is universal, that
is, every particle and every form of energy is affected by it. Except for the
first split-second after the origin of the universe in the Big Bang, it
dominates the universe at large throughout its evolution. The law of
gravitation, as is well known, states that gravitational force between two
bodies is proportional to the product of their masses, and inversely
proportional to the square of distance between them. Gravity is the
weakest of all forces of nature, but also the most dominant one. The
gravitational attraction of a single proton for an electron is about a billion
billion billion billion (1038) times weaker than the electromagnetic force
between them. Gravity can act over large distances and it is always
attractive. Its effects always add up rather than cancel. In the case of
bodies composed of enormous number of particles, such as planets or
stars, the tiny gravitational attraction of each particle adds up and grows
into a gigantic force.

     The second fundamental force of nature is electromagnetism; it
operates between subatomic particles which have electric charges. The
phenomena of nature described by chemistry are all manifestations of
electromagnetism. Chemical reactions involve the rearrangements of
electrons in the orbits around atomic nuclei, and electromagnetic force
governs these interactions. Protons have positive charge, and electrons
negative. Electromagnetic force between two positive charges is repulsive,
as is also the force between two negative charges; but the force is
attractive between positive and negative charges. Each atom has zero net
charge because the negative charge of its electrons is exactly balanced by
the positive charge of protons in its nucleus. There are almost equal
number of protons and electrons in an atom and so its total charge is zero.
A large body, like the Earth or the Sun, contains nearly equal number of
positively charged protons and negatively charged electrons. These
charges cancel each other out, and so there is very little net
electromagnetic force in large bodies. That is to say, the overall charge is
zero. Thus, most large quantities of matter are electrically neutral, and so
do not exhibit electromagnetic force. Hence, the most significant effects
of electromagnetism are observed only at the levels of atoms. In
individual atoms, electrons have associated electromagnetic field which
holds them in their orbits around the nucleus.

     The third fundamental force of nature is weak nuclear force. Unlike
gravitational and electromagnetic forces which have long range, the weak
force has extremely short range. It is much weaker than strong nuclear
force. The weak force accounts for radioactivity or disintegration of atoms
like uranium. In spite of the fact that there are many subatomic particles,
only a small number of them, namely, electrons, photons, protons and
neutrinos, are stable; that is, if left to themselves, these do not
disintegrate. Other particles are unstable, and will disintegrate rather
rapidly into stable ones; and as they disintegrate, they emit particles which
are detected as radioactivity. For example, isolated neutrons are unstable,
and will decay after a period of time into a proton, an electron and an anti-
neutrino. It is the weak force that governs the disintegration of particles
like neutron.

     The last of the fundamental forces of nature is strong nuclear force
which is the strongest of the four forces with shortest range of them all. It
accounts for the stability of nuclei of atoms. The nuclei of atoms except
those of hydrogen contain a number of protons (with positive charge) and
neutrons (with no charge) packed closely together. These nuclear particles
themselves are composite objects, each made up of smaller units called
‘quarks.' The strong force holds quarks together within protons and
neutrons in atomic nuclei. Hence, the strong force is also called ‘quark-
binding' force. It acts attractively among protons and neutrons in order to
hold atomic nuclei together; it is strong enough to counteract the repulsive
force of protons in the nucleus. This force has an extremely short range,
dropping sharply to zero beyond a distance of about a ten-trillionth of a
centimeter. At normal energies, the strong force operates by binding
protons and neutrons of atomic nuclei even though the electromagnetic
force of repulsion between protons tries to blow nuclei apart. However, at
high energies and enormous temperatures, the strong force becomes much
weaker, unable to hold protons and neutrons together, and then the nuclei
break apart.51
     From the foregoing descriptions of gravitational, electromagnetic,
weak and strong forces, it appears that they are quite different and have
nothing in common. But according to quantum field theories, the
differences among the four forces are merely superficial. This is borne out
by the fact that these theories interpret all the four forces as interactions
mediated by ‘gauge bosons,' also called ‘force-carriers,' ‘exchange
particles' or ‘messenger particles.' Each force interacts between particles
through some property — ‘charge' for electromagnetism, ‘flavour' for
weak force and ‘colour' for strong force. The virtual photon is the
exchange particle of electromagnetic interaction; the exchange of virtual
photon mediates the interaction between charged particles.
Electromagnetic and weak forces are unified into electroweak field theory;
its exchange particles are ‘vector bosons' and virtual photons. The virtual
particles of the strong, quark-binding force consist of a set of eight
‘coloured gluons.' The force-carriers of gravitational interaction are
supposedly gravitons; gravitation is believed to take place by the exchange
of gravitons. Thus in all, there are twelve virtual, exchange particles which
mediate the four fundamental forces or interactions of nature.

      The initial attempts at formulating quantum field theory started with
the unification of electromagnetic interaction and special theory of
relativity. This theory, we have seen, is called ‘quantum electrodynamics'
(QED) which is the first relativistic quantum field theory invented. “It was
‘relativistic' because it incorporated the principle of Einstein's special
relativity theory; it was ‘quantum' because it embraced the idea of the new
quantum mechanics; and it was a ‘field theory' because the primary
objects of its investigation were fields like electric and magnetic field.”52
Capra explains the important characteristics of this theory:

       The striking new feature of quantum electrodynamics arises
       from the combination of two concepts: that of the
       electromagnetic field, and that of photons as the particle
       manifestations of electromagnetic waves. Since photons are
       also electromagnetic waves, and since these waves are
       vibrating fields, the photons must be manifestations of
       electromagnetic fields. Hence the concept of a ‘quantum
       field': that is, of a field which can take the form of quanta, or
       particles.53

     According to QED, charged particles, such as electrons and protons,
interact with one another by exchanging virtual photons which are the
force-carriers of electromagnetic field.54 It was invented in the 1920s by
Heisenberg, Wolfgang Pauli, Pascual Jordan, and Paul Dirac. The final
version of quantum electrodynamics was developed by Richard Feynman,
Julian Schwinger, and S. Tomonaga in the late 1940s. It is the first model
of relativistic quantum field theory and even now the most successful. The
agreement between QED and experiments is absolutely stunning. Some of
the predictions have been tested in experiments to an extraordinary degree
of accuracy, and in some cases better than one part in a trillion. Such
extremely close agreement gives physicists great confidence that the
‘photon exchange' model of quantum electrodynamics is absolutely
correct. Quantum electrodynamics was so successful that it became the
paradigm for the interpretation of other forces in terms of particle
interaction.

     The success of quantum electrodynamics inspired particle physicists
in the 1960s and 1970s to employ similar methods for developing quantum
mechanical interpretations of weak, strong, and gravitational forces. Now,
the electromagnetic and weak nuclear interactions are ordinarily
considered as separate. But in the 1960s, quantum physicists, Sheldon
Glashow, Steven Weinberg and Abdus Salam found that these interactions
can be combined in a quantum field description even though their
manifestations are quite distinct in the world around us. They invented a
quantum field theory which unifies quantum electrodynamics and weak
interaction into a mathematical formalism, called ‘electroweak theory.'
The unified electroweak interaction is mediated by a set of four particles -
- a photon and three particles of weak interaction called ‘intermediate
vector bosons.' These are denoted by W+ (pronounced W plus) and W-
(pronounced W minus) and a neutral one Zo (pronounced Z naught). The
key to the unification of electromagnetism and weak interaction into
electroweak theory is a principle which physicists had long known: that
the range of a force is directly related to the mass of the virtual particle
that is exchanged; that is, the bigger the mass, shorter the range. The
photon is massless, and so electromagnetism has unlimited range. The fact
that the weak force has very short range implies that its exchange particles
have very high mass. If somehow the mass of these particles could vanish,
then electromagnetism and weak nuclear force would actually be quite
similar in their properties.

     Precisely this happens at very high energies and temperatures where
the properties of virtual particles of electromagnetism and weak
interaction are similar and indistinguishable. Thus photon, the virtual
particle of electromagnetic interaction, and the three vector bosons, the
exchange particles of weak interaction, behave in a similar way at higher
energies where the distinction between electromagnetic and weak forces
disappears; but they become distinct at low energies, as in the present
universe. Hawking explains:

       In the Weinberg-Salam theory, at energies much greater than
       100 GeV, the three new particles and the photon would all
       behave in a similar manner. But at the lower particle energies
       that occur in most normal situations, this symmetry between
       the particles would be broken. W+, W-, and Zo, would acquire
       large masses, making the forces they carry have a very short
       range.55

Crucially, such a project works out only if we assume that the virtual
particles W+, W- and Zo are really massless - that they have no intrinsic
mass; instead, they acquire their high masses by a new type of physical
mechanism called ‘Higgs mechanism.'56 These virtual particles were
discovered in 1983 at CERN, Geneva, with exactly the properties predicted
by the theory, and electroweak theory was thus confirmed.57

     Next, in sequence was the invention of the quantum field theory of
strong nuclear force; it is called ‘quantum chromodynamics' or QCD for
short. It was proposed by David Gross, David Politzer and Frank Wilczek
in 1973. The strong force acts on quarks which are bound together in
protons and neutrons of atomic nuclei. QCD was constructed in analogy
with quantum electrodynamics. Following the lead given by QED,
quantum chromodynamics predicts the existence of virtual particles which
mediate strong interaction between quarks with the property of ‘colour.'
QCD postulates three different types of colour charges, called ‘red,'
‘green' and ‘blue.' The effect of strong force is limited to the behaviour of
quarks, and of composite particles built from quarks, such as the familiar
protons and neutrons which make up atomic nuclei. Whereas QED
requires just one kind of photon, and electroweak theory employs three
types of vector bosons, QCD postulates eight distinct ‘gluons' in order to
effect all the interactions between three colours of quarks - red, blue,
green; this renders the theory much more complex and cumbersome. QCD
has not been quite successful in describing the processes involving strong
interactions. In spite of many great efforts, physicists have not been able
to apply QCD beyond a narrow range of phenomena.58

     Now, it is significant that the range of each interaction depends on the
mass of its mediating particle. The more massive the particle is, the
shorter its range, and the less massive the particle, the longer its range.
The effects of less massive particles are observed in our ordinary life
conditions. For instance, the electromagnetic interaction is mediated by
the exchange of massless photons and so its range is indefinitely long. The
effects of electric and magnetic forces are encountered in the everyday
world. The gravitational force is believed to be mediated by massless
gravitons, and so its range is infinite. As in the case of electromagnetic
force, the effects of gravitational force are also experienced in the world
around us. Further, strong interaction exchanges massive particles - gluons
-- and so it has a very short range. It extends only about the size of a
proton and so cannot build up a macroscopic force. Strong interaction is
thus not observed in everyday world. Similarly, the weak interaction
exchanges heavy particles -- the vector bosons W± and Zo -- and so it has
also an extremely short range like the strong force. Thus, electromagnetic
and gravitational forces have massless mediating particles, and their range
is infinite. In contrast, the strong and weak nuclear forces have exchange
particles which are heavy and their ranges are very short.
     We summarize the dynamics of the three particle interactions - of
electromagnetism, weak and strong nuclear forces -- in the words of
Greene: “The photons, gluons and weak gauge bosons provide the
microscopic mechanism for transmitting the forces they constitute.”59

3.3. Quantum Gravity and Quantum Vacuum

      In unifying the theory of relativity and quantum mechanics, the first
stage is the integration of the special theory with quantum physics. The
relativistic quantum field theories of quantum electrodynamics,
electroweak theory and quantum chromodynamics accomplish this task.
The next step is to unify the general theory of relativity with quantum
mechanics. This is achieved by constructing a quantum field theory of
gravity or a quantum theory of gravity. The general theory, we know, is
first and foremost a theory of gravity and so the task before physicists is
the quantization of gravity. This implies the quantum mechanical
treatment of space-time fabric since according to the general theory,
gravity is space-time curvature. A quantum theory of gravity takes us to
the quantum vacuum - the ultimate space-time fabric.

3.3.1. Towards Quantum Theories of Gravity

     Our discourse on quantum theory of gravity starts with some
conceptual paradoxes in Einstein's general theory of relativity and in
quantum physics. That is, when these theories are applied to certain
domains of physical reality, the equations produce infinities. Appearance
of infinities in the equations of a physical theory signals the break down of
the theory in question.

3.3.1.1. Infinities Galore

    The relativistic quantum field theories were invented by great
physicists with relative ease. The three non-gravitational forces of nature
were interpreted in terms of particle interactions. However, even after
decades of strenuous efforts, the finest physicists in the world have not
been able to construct a satisfactory quantum field theory of gravity or a
quantum theory of gravity. The question is, why does gravitation so
stubbornly resist quantum mechanical treatment? In order to get a clue to
answer this question, we propose to examine the fate of the concept of
gravity in modern physics; that is, how it came to break down with
infinities. We know, it was the great Isaac Newton who for the first time in
the history of physics proposed a theory of gravity in a systematic way. He
formulated the law of universal gravitation as a force of attraction between
bodies that have masses. These bodies interact with each other under of
the influence of gravitation in space and time. However, gravity in no way
interacts with space and time which do not influence it either. Space and
time function merely as the passive background of all motions of bodies
caused by gravitational force. Although Newton proposed the theory of
gravitation, he had no explanation for it. He is famously quoted to have
said: “I have not as yet been able to discover the reason for these
properties of gravity from phenomena, and I do not feign hypotheses.”60

      Einstein's general theory of relativity radically modified Newton's
concept of gravity. The special theory unified Newtonian space and time
into space-time, and the general theory incorporated gravity with space-
time. Gravitation is not strictly speaking a force separate from space-time,
but it is a warping of space-time. It is the curvature of space-time in the
presence of mass/energy. This means that wherever there is mass/energy, it
warps space-time continuum. The larger and denser is mass/energy, the
more pronounced is the curvature of space-time. John Polkinghorne says:
“Albert Einstein's successive great discoveries of special and general
relativity showed that space, time, and matter are intimately related in a
single package deal. Matter curves the geometry of spacetime and
curvature, in turn, deflects the paths of matter.”61 By the same token, space
and time become active ‘players' in the cosmic drama whereas they are
passive ‘onlookers' in Newtonian mechanics. Hawking says: “Space and
time are now dynamic quantities: when a body moves, or a force acts, it
affects the curvature of space and time — and in turn the structure of
space-time affects the way in which bodies move and forces act. Space and
time not only affect but also are affected by everything that happens in the
Universe.”62
      Now, precisely this dynamic nature of space-time resulted in its
infinite curvature (gravity) and the consequent downfall of the general
theory of relativity. Such is the implication of ‘singularity theorems'
invented by Stephen Hawking and Roger Penrose in the year 1964. They
demonstrated that along with some general conditions of matter/energy in
the universe, every solution to Einstein's general theory of relativity
eventually develops a state of singularity at which a star collapses to a
point of infinite spacetime curvature (gravity), infinite density and infinite
temperature. Hawking explains: “This means that all the matter in the
[collapsing] star will be compressed into a region of zero volume, so the
density of matter and the curvature of space-time become infinite. In other
words, one has a singularity contained within a region of space-time
known as a black hole.”63 Moreover, Hawking and Penrose found that the
standard model of the Big Bang theory satisfies the requirements of
singularity theorem. In 1970, they proved that “our Universe must have
had a spacetime singularity at the beginning of its big bang expansion, and
if it one day recollapses, it must produce a singularity in its big crunch.”64
Paul Davies observes: “Neither space nor time can be extended back
through the initial singularity.”65 For, at the Big Bang singularity certain
parameters, like space-time warpage (gravity), density and temperature,
become infinite.

     When a quantity that the equations of physics describe becomes
infinite, it means that they cease to be meaningful. It implies that the
theory in question is employed in a domain that is beyond the bounds of
its applicability. Hence, the general theory of relativity breaks down at
singularity on account of the appearance of infinite quantities. Davies
remarks: “The whole mathematical edifice on which the [general] theory
of relativity is based becomes quite meaningless under such conditions of
infinite density, showing that the theory is falling apart at the seams.”66
Likewise, Clifford Will observes:

       The idea that there should exist singularities of spacetime,
       places where general relativity and all the other laws of
       physics should break down, is very disturbing. Physicists are
       uncomfortable with the possibility of being unable to predict
       the future from some given initial data, but this was precisely
       what a singularity would do, because the physics that emerges
       from a singularity is not under any control.67

Physicist Dennis Sciama caustically comments that the general theory
“contains within itself the seeds of its own destruction.”68

     The point here is that according to the general theory, as we saw, the
density distribution of mass/energy in the universe determines the
curvature of space-time or gravity. Now, if this theory is applied
uncritically all ‘the way down' to the origin of the universe, it predicts that
the space-time curvature/gravity would become infinite. Such a state of an
infinite curvature of space-time is Big Bang singularity. In fact, even
before singularity is reached, the field equations of the general theory
break down and space-time curvature becomes infinite - at the Planck
scales: at the Planck time of 10-43 sec and Planck length of 10-33 cm, with
density of matter at 1093 gm/cc, temperatures above 1032 K, and energies in
excess of 1019 GeV. At these Planck domains of physical reality, gravity
displays uncontrolled behaviour, and the general theory of relativity,
Einstein's theory of gravitation, breaks down spewing out infinities.69

     Quantum theory, in its turn, too had its own bundle of troubles with
infinities in quantum field theories. Although Dirac's quantization of
electromagnetic field solved some problems, it raised many more. Briefly,
these difficulties relate to the frequent occurrence of infinities in the
theory. Infinities began to appear in mathematical formalisms when
physicists attempted to employ quantum mechanics to describe fields like
electromagnetic field. Smolin explains:

       The problem is that the electric and magnetic fields have
       values at every point in space. This means that there are an
       infinite number of variables (even in a finite volume there are
       an infinite number of points, hence an infinite number of
       variables). In quantum theory, there are uncontrollable
       fluctuations in the values of every quantum variable. An
       infinite number of variables, fluctuating uncontrollably, can
       lead to equations that get out of hand and predict infinite
       numbers when you ask questions about the probability of
       some event happening, or the strength of some force.70

Such wild behaviour of equations is mathematically repugnant and
suggests that the theoretical framework has broken down somewhere along
the way. Nevertheless, the seemingly absurd infinities that occur in
quantum field theories are handled in most cases by a mathematical
technique called ‘renormalization.' Ingenious physicists, like Freeman
Dyson, Richard Feynman and Julian Schwinger, invented this method of
renormalization in order to ‘tame' infinities by cleverly cancelling them
out with other infinities. The resulting formalism provides meaningful and
remarkably successful predictions. Hawking comments: “Although this
technique is rather dubious mathematically, it does seem to work in
practice, and has been used with these [quantum field] theories to make
predictions that agree with observations to an extraordinary degree of
accuracy.”71

     However, unlike the three non-gravitational interactions, gravitation
resists the technique of renormalization. According to quantum field
theories, as we saw, each of the three interactions -electromagnetic, weak
and strong nuclear - has virtual, exchange particles. Gravitation is also
believed to be mediated by such an exchange particle, namely, graviton; it
purportedly plays the role equivalent to photon in quantum
electrodynamics. A graviton, though it exists in theory, interacts extremely
weakly with matter (far more weakly than neutrinos), and so even vast
improvement on today's technology would not produce machines that
would detect it.72 That is to say, since gravity is exceedingly weak, there is
no physically realistic way to conduct an experiment at energy levels at
which its quantum mechanical effects would be manifest; it would take a
particle accelerator of galactic size even to approach the required energies
- energies in excess of 1019 GeV at the Planck time of 10-43 sec. It is
suggested that it would take 100 years of experimentation by a particle
collider as heavy as Jupiter to detect one graviton.
     Nevertheless, theoretical physicists can mathematically calculate
graviton's interactions with matter; but when they do so, they encounter
infinities in their equations. Of course, infinities arising in the equations
of quantum electrodynamics can be tamed by the mathematical technique
of renormalization. However, that is not possible with infinities generated
by graviton. Pagels attests: “But the infinities encountered in the
graviton's interactions could not be ‘renormalized' away; they were far
worse.”73 They cannot be accommodated by means of renormalization.
Greene expresses it differently: “The infinities arising from attempts to
merge general relativity and quantum mechanics are far more severe and
are not amenable to the normalization cure.”74 John Bell makes an
interesting remark about such conceptual problems in quantum mechanics:
“But to an unusual extent its [of quantum physics] ultimate fate is
apparent in its internal structure. It carries in itself the seeds of its own
destruction.”75 Incidentally, we recall that Sciama has made an identical
remark about the break down of the general theory of relativity: that it
“contains within itself the seeds of its own destruction.”76

     Nonetheless, what is most intriguing about the occurrence of these
infinities in the general theory of relativity and quantum field theories is
that we actually observe nothing of the sort in nature. That is the point of
Smolin's scathing remark: “In nature, we have yet to encounter anything
measurable that has an infinite value. But in both quantum theory and
general relativity, we encounter predictions of physically sensible
quantities becoming infinite. This is likely the way that nature punishes
impudent theorists who dare to break her unity.”77 Hawking makes a
similar observation about theories that churn out infinities: “One therefore
has a theory that seems to predict that certain quantities, such as the
curvature of space-time, are really infinite, yet these quantities can be
observed and measured to be perfectly finite!”78 However, in a truly
unified theory, there would be no infinities at all. Smolin assures us: “If
infinities are signs of missing unification, a unified theory will have none.
It will be what we call a finite theory, a theory that answers every question
in terms of sensible, finite numbers.”79 The first step towards such a
unified theory is the invention of a quantum theory of gravity.
3.3.1.2. Quantum Theories of Gravity

     The foregoing discussions on the break down of both the general
theory of relativity as well as quantum field theories spewing out infinities
confirm that Planck magnitudes represent a watershed in our ability to
describe space-time domain. At the Planck time of 10-43 sec, the Planck
length of 10-33 cm, with the Planck density of 1094 gm/cc, space-time
warpage/gravitational field becomes enormous and undergoes radical
modification; and quantum effects begin to be felt on account of
uncertainty principle. John Gribbin, Arthur Eddington and John Boslough
have made some significant comments on the oddity of the Planck regime.
Gribbin refers to the uniqueness of Planck dimensions:

       One way of interpreting the Planck time is that it defines both
       a time scale and a distance scale where the quantum effects of
       gravity dominate the structure of space-time. The distance
       scale of the Planck units is the distance scale at which gravity
       becomes the equal of the other forces of nature, corresponding
       to temperatures above 10-32 K energies in excess of 1019 GeV.80

Similarly, the great physicist Eddington remarks about the peculiar
character of the Planck length of 10-33 cm:

       It seems to be inevitable that this [Planck] length must play
       some role in any complete interpretation of gravitation. . . . In
       recent years great progress has been made in knowledge of the
       excessively minute; but until we can appreciate details of
       structure down to the quadrillionth of quintillionth of a
       centimetre, the most sublime of all the forces of Nature
       [gravity] remains outside the purview of the theories of
       physics.81

John Boslough speaks about the scenario at the ‘wall of Planck time:' “The
wall of Planck time comes at 10-43 second. At this point there is a
fundamental breakdown in the ability of physicists to describe space, time,
or matter. It is presumed that gravity has just broken its bond with the
single unified force that existed at the instant of the Big Bang.”82 Such
Planck regime is purportedly the domain of quantum gravity. Steven
Winstein explains:

       It is almost Gospel that quantum gravity is what happens
       when you reach the Planck scale. The standard refrain is that
       ‘something peculiar' happens to our concepts of space, time,
       and causality at such scales requiring radical revisions that
       must be described by the quantum theory of gravity. This scale
       is so remote from current experimental capabilities that the
       empirical testing of quantum gravity proposals along standard
       lines is rendered near-impossible.83

      Now the question is, what is this ‘something peculiar' happening at
the Planck scales such that it requires radical revisions of
Newtonian/Einsteinian concepts of space and time? There is also the
related question, why does space-time warpage become so enormous -
really infinite - so that the field equations of the general theory of
relativity break down at these dimensions? The answer is that while
Einstein transformed Newton's concepts of space and time into space-
time, he nevertheless continued to assume that spacetime is continuous
and smooth; that it is a continuum.84 David Bohm says: “Similarly, the
special theory of relativity requires the strict continuity of space-time; and
the general theory of relativity assumes that its basic components space-
time and matter fields be continuous and smooth.”85 That is to say,
according to the theory of relativity, the properties of space remain
homogeneous and unchanged even in smaller and smaller scales as one
‘descends' to Planck dimensions. As Capek rightly points out, the
Newtonian conception of the homogeneity of space assumes that the
structure of space must have identical quality “no matter what scale of
magnitude we consider.”86

     However, this assumption is no longer valid at the extremely minute
Planck magnitudes because quantum effects begin to affect space-time
fabric on account of uncertainty principle. This means that at the Planck
scales, the general theory of relativity can no longer be employed because
it assumes that space-time is a smooth continuum. Under such domains,
space-time is not continuous and smooth, and gravity itself needs quantum
mechanical treatment. William Stoeger says: “A rather different theory of
gravity and space-time at these extremely high temperatures and energies
is certainly needed, but that does not necessarily imply that such
superunification [of all forces] must follow.”87 This implies that the very
structure of space-time -the bedrock of physical reality -- has to be
quantized at the Planck dimensions. Peat comments: “Now this is a very
curious result, for it implies that, at the subatomic level, space-time
curvature has to be explained in terms of quantum mechanical gravitons.
Somehow the structure of space-time itself demands a quantum
mechanical explanation.”88 Stoeger shares a similar view: “This almost
certainly requires quantization of the gravitational field itself, and
therefore, in some way, a quantum description of space and time along
with massenergy at extreme energies.”89 Stoeger further suggests: “It is
with good reason, therefore, that most physicists see the predicted initial
singularity as an indication of a regime within which the classical
continuum model of space, time, and gravity does not apply, and needs to
be replaced with a quantum description of gravity.”90 This is the domain
where gravity is extremely strong, and where quantum effects begin to
dominate the structure of space-time. Quantum theories of gravity
describe the quantum behaviour of gravitational field, that is, quantized
space-time framework. These theories seek to describe gravitation at the
Planck magnitudes according to the principles of quantum mechanics.
Winstein opines: “Quantum gravity, broadly construed, is a physical
theory incorporating both the principles of general relativity and quantum
theory. Such a theory is expected to be able to provide a satisfactory
description of the microstructure of spacetime at the Planck scale.”91

      The foregoing discussions imply that it is difficult, if not impossible,
to identify the space-time realm at the Planck dimensions with the space
and time of Newtonian mechanics, or the space-time of the theory of
relativity. Physicists suggest that the Newtonian and relativistic concepts
of space and time would lose their smooth and continuous nature at these
magnitudes. Space-time would be quantized, that is, rendered discrete on
account of Heisenberg's uncertainty principle. But there is a catch. The
uncertainty relation was actually formulated to describe the quantum
world at the scale of atoms and elementary particles. To use it to talk about
spacetime domain at the Planck scales requires an extrapolation that is as
great as the change of scale between our own bodies and elementary
particles. Nevertheless, most physicists are confident to apply uncertainty
principle right down to the Planck length of 10-33 cm, and at such small
distances, it is clearly necessary to abandon the smooth and continuous
character of space-time of classical physics.

     However, in spite of the hard work of some of the most brilliant
particle physicists in the world, a satisfactory theory of spacetime
framework at the Planck domains, and a quantum theory of gravity have
not emerged. Although there is no complete idea of what a quantum theory
of gravity might involve, some promising hypotheses are put forward.
Thus, there is an agreement among physicists that the space-time of the
general theory of relativity must be quantized - rendered discrete -- in
quantum theories of gravity. This suggests that although the Newtonian
and Einsteinian spacetime appears continuous and smooth, at the Planck
magnitudes space-time would be much more lumpy and complicated,
perhaps consisting of ‘foam-like' topology of ‘bubbles' that are continually
forming and ‘de-forming.' Renowned quantum physicists Stephen
Hawking, James Hartle and John Wheeler have dared to make some
speculations regarding the topology of space-time regime prevailing at the
Planck scales. According to them, under extreme conditions of the Planck
magnitudes, the smooth space-time of general theory of relativity would
have been radically modified since it is subject to quantum fluctuations on
account of uncertainty principle.

     According to Hawking and Hartle, at the Planck time of 10-43 sec,
quantum uncertainties associated with uncertainty principle would have
begun to erase the difference between space and time. At this moment, the
distinction between space and time becomes blurred, and concepts, such as
‘before' and ‘after' lose their meaning. Time begins to ‘turn' into space;
time becomes ‘spatialized.' In Hawking's terminology, time is ‘smeared'
into space and becomes ‘imaginary.'92 He says: “That is, time is imaginary
and is indistinguishable from directions in space.”93 Imaginary time
provides a way of looking at time dimension as if it were a dimension of
space, so that it is possible to move forwards and backwards along time,
just as one can move right and left, or up and down in space. Hence, at the
Planck scales, there is no longer a time-dimension, but only four space-
like dimensions; and then it is more accurate to talk, not of space-time, but
of four-dimensional space. Hawking calls it ‘Euclidean spacetime.' He
explains:

       In Euclidean space-time there is no difference between the
       time direction and directions in space. On the other hand, in
       real space-time, in which events are labeled by real values of
       the time coordinate, it is easy to tell the difference. . . . One
       can regard the use of imaginary time as merely a
       mathematical device - or trick - to calculate answers about
       real space-time. However, there may be more to it than that. It
       may be that Euclidean space-time is the fundamental concept
       and what we think of as real space-time is just a figment of
       our imagination.94

      Likewise, John Wheeler has attempted to unify the laws of general
theory of relativity and those of quantum mechanics, and has come up
with still more revolutionary concept of space-time. Wheeler and many
physicists believe that at the Planck magnitudes, quantum disturbance on
account of uncertainty principle becomes so severe that the topology of
space-time would be completely modified.95 It is a domain of physical
reality which is governed by gravity as well as by uncertainty principle; it
is the regime of quantum gravity which radically transforms the geometry
of spacetime. Space-time dimension at the Planck magnitudes is believed
to be, not as a smooth, flat sheet of paper, but as a structure in which loops
and bridges between one region in space and another appear and vanish
frenetically. The geometry of space at these scales is highly curved and
warped, subject to energetic, random fluctuations. On account of the
extreme uncertainty of this regime, it can even be said that at this level,
space cannot ‘make up its mind' which of the infinite number of
topological possibilities it would like to manifest. Space-time, thus, is not
a static stage upon which nature dances, but it reverberates between a
multitude of alternate geometries.96

     Wheeler suggests that at the size of the Planck length of 10- 33 cm or
smaller, quantum fluctuations would be so enormous that space begins to
‘boil;' he uses the term ‘quantum foam' in order to describe this state of
the frenzy of space-time. ‘Quantum foam' refers to the frothy, writhing,
violent character of space-time fabric at the Planck scales. Thus, in
quantum theory of gravity, the smooth structure of relativistic space-time
takes on the topology of quantum foam. Nobel Laureate Kip Thorne
explains:

       Quantum gravity then radically changes the character of
       spacetime: It ruptures the unification of space and time into
       spacetime. It unglues space and time from each other, and
       then destroys time as a concept and destroys the definiteness
       of space. Time ceases to exist; no longer can we say that ‘this
       thing happens before that one,' because without time, there is
       no concept of ‘before' or ‘after.' Space, the sole remaining
       remnant of what was once a unified spacetime, becomes a
       random, probabilistic froth, like soapsuds.97




             Figure 15. Quantum space-time ‘foam'
      Space-time would break up and take on features more akin to those of
turbulent ‘foam' than of smooth continuum. Instead of the continuous, flat
space-time of general relativity, it would display a foam-like structure, and
would assume frothing, turbulent, twisted forms. (See Figure 15) Thorne
illustrates the nature of ‘space-time foam' with the example of a piece of
wood cloaked in water being burned out by fire:

       Before its rupture (that is, outside the singularity and Planck
       magnitudes), spacetime is like a piece of wood impregnated
       with water. In this analogy, wood represents space, the water
       represents time, and the two (wood and water; space and time)
       are tightly interwoven and unified. The singularity and the
       laws of quantum gravity that rule it are like fire into which the
       water-impregnated wood is thrown. The fire boils the water
       out of the wood, leaving the wood alone and vulnerable; in the
       singularity, the laws of quantum gravity destroy time, leaving
       space alone and vulnerable. The fire then converts the wood
       into a froth of flakes and ashes; the laws of quantum gravity
       then convert space into a random, probabilistic froth.98

Physicists have given different names to quantum space-time foam.
Davies calls it ‘superspace.'99 Gribbin's designation for it is
‘superspacetime.' Willem B. Drees names it, ‘Mother Spacetime.' At its
deepest level, super-spacetime is foamy or granular rather than smooth,
like the structure of ordinary space-time. Super-spacetime contains no
enduring quantum particles like electrons and protons.100 It is indeed the
quantum vacuum.101

3.3.2. The Quantum Vacuum

     We have reached the concept of quantum vacuum via quantum theory
of gravity. However, the concept of quantum vacuum - empty space -- has
a story of its own. It is in fact the appalling saga of Newtonian empty
space transformed into the ‘plenum' or fullness -the vacuum. The essential
characteristic of vacuum is that it is ever ‘fluctuating' - creating and
annihilating particles and anti-particles.
3.3.2.1. Empty Space as Quantum Vacuum

     Newtonian space is empty in the literal sense of the term - the
emptiest possible entity.102 Space was regarded as the homogeneous
medium existing objectively and independently of its physical content,
and its rigid and timeless structure was described by the axioms and
theorems of Euclidean geometry. This self-sufficiency of space and its
independence from matter were clearly formulated by Newton in his
Principia Mathematica: “Absolute space, in its own nature, without regard
to anything external, remains always similar and immovable.”103 Space,
according to Newtonian mechanism, is the passive container of all matter;
it affects matter in no way, nor is it affected by matter. It is pure and
empty, and is characterized by the property of homogeneity. This means
that space has the same quality always and everywhere. From
homogeneity follows the causal inertness or passivity of space. That is to
say, space is completely indifferent to all changes in the universe; space
does not initiate any change, nor do changes influence it. Such
homogeneous space is smooth and continuous. Space is correlated with
another absolute -the Newtonian time -- with most of the properties of
space, except that time is succession whereas space is side-by-sidedness.
Space and time are absolute and they constitute the background of all
changes in the universe.

     Einstein's theory of relativity completely transformed Newtonian
concepts of space (and time) in two steps. First, the special theory unified
space and time into space-time, thus rendering space and time relative to
each other, and stripping them of their independent status. However, like
Newton's space and time, spacetime of special relativity constitutes the
background of all events in the universe. Space-time and physical bodies
of the universe are independent of each other. Second, in the general
theory, spacetime is rendered relative to mass/energy. There is no
independent space-time apart from mass/energy. Physical reality is space-
time-mass/energy. Whereas Newtonian space was independent of matter,
according to the general theory, there is an intimate relation between
space-time and mass/energy. Capra beautifully summarizes the
transformations that have taken place in the concepts of space and time
and mass/energy in the theory of relativity:

       In the general theory of relativity, the classical concepts of
       space and time as absolute and independent entities are
       completely abolished. Not only are all measurements
       involving space and time relative, depending on the state of
       motion of the observer, but the whole structure of space-time
       is inextricably linked to the distribution of matter. Space is
       curved to different degrees, and time flows at different rates
       in different parts of the universe. We have thus come to
       apprehend that our notions of a threedimensional Euclidean
       space and of linear flowing time are limited to our ordinary
       experience of the physical world and have to be completely
       abandoned when we extend this experience.104

      John Wheeler's famous statement expresses the intimate relation
between space-time and mass/energy: “Space-time tells matter how to
move; matter tells space-time how to curve.” Evidently, the theory of
relativity rendered Newtonian, inert space dynamic, first by unifying it
with time in the special theory, and then by incorporating spacetime with
mass/energy in the general theory. However, in spite of such radical
transformations of Newtonian concept of space (and of time), the theory of
relativity carried over certain of its suppositions, namely, its smooth and
continuous character. Peat remarks: “While Einstein revolutionized the
Newtonian concept of space and time, he nevertheless continued to assume
that space is continuous. That is, the properties of space continue
unchanged to smaller and smaller scales.”105

      The advent of quantum mechanics, and in particular quantum field
theories, heralded a radical revolution in the conception of space.
Newtonian empty space and Einsteinian dynamic space-time were
transformed beyond all recognition. It is now called ‘quantum vacuum
state' or simply ‘quantum vacuum.' The vacuum is usually thought of as a
region of space from which everything has been removed -- all particles,
all waves, all fields. According to quantum field theories, even if a region
of space can in principle be emptied of all matter, this vacuum is neither
empty nor quiescent. Smolin tells us the reason:

       If something is exactly still, it has a definite position and
       momentum, and this contradicts the uncertainty principle,
       which says that you cannot know both these things about a
       particle. A consequence is that even when the temperature is
       zero, things keep moving. There is a small residual energy
       associated with any particle and any degree of freedom, even
       at zero temperature. This is called vacuum, or ground-state,
       energy.106 Consider, for instance, a volume of space in a small
       box; empty it of all matter, and remove all photons or
       elementary particles within it. We might think of it as pure,
       empty space. However, Heisenberg's uncertainty principle
       does not allow empty space to be featureless. Quantum
       physicists believe that such vacuum contains a residual energy
       that persists even when all matter and fields have been
       experimentally eliminated. Calculations show that this
       residual energy is enormous. “In one cubic centimetre of
       empty space the amount of energy is much greater than the
       total amount of energy of all the matter in the known
       universe!”107 Since there is no known means of removing it, it
       would be truly the energy of empty space, of vacuum itself.
       This energy density is not confined to regions of pure vacuum;
       but it is present throughout the whole of space, including
       regions where matter and other forms of energy are present. In
       this sense, the energy of the vacuum appears to be a vast
       omnipresent ocean of infinite energy; and all other forms of
       energy — thermal and gravitational, for instance -- appear as
       the thinnest of films upon the surface of this fathomless sea.
       Such energy appears to be an inherent property of space itself.

     In this way, quantum physicists arrived at a radically revolutionized
concept of space -- the vacuum -- that is not empty; rather, it is plenum -
fullness -- of all forces and fields. Hence, the classical, Newtonian empty
space free of all matter and fields is not physically realizable. Pagels
speaks about quantum vacuum in different ways: “Instead of ‘Nature
abhors a vacuum' the view of the new physics suggests, ‘The vacuum is all
of physics.' Everything that ever existed or can exist is already potentially
there in the nothingness of space.”108 Then he states: “Almost everything is
vacuum.”109 Expressing it ironically, Pagels says that “it [vacuum] is not
empty; it is a plenum.”110 In quantum field theories, the quantum vacuum
is defined as the quantum state of lowest possible energy. Generally, it
includes no physical particles although it still contains quantum fields.
Indeed, at the quantum level of description, vacuum is the dominant
structure. What we call particles are only minor disturbances bubbling up
in this sea of vacuum.

      In order to get an idea of the physical nature of quantum vacuum, we
zoom in sequentially, and magnify ever smaller regions of the spatial
fabric with a hypothetical super-microscope; thereby we examine space
and its properties at microscopic dimensions. (See Figure 16) We start
zooming from the scale of our bodies (hundreds of cms) which is the first
level. The second level is the size of bacteria (10-5 to 2 10 5 cm). The third
is the magnitude of an atom (10-8 cm). The fourth level is the scale of an
atomic nucleus (10-13 cm). Further zooming takes us to the fifth level, to
10-33 cm which is twenty powers of 10 less than atomic nucleus. As we
zoom in, at the primary levels of magnification -- the first, second, third
and fourth levels -- the structure of space retains the same basic form. At
these levels, space would appear completely continuous and smooth with
tiny amounts of curvature. This would be Newtonian-Einsteinian flat space
- the continuum. From the classical point of view, we would expect this
flat image of space to persist all the way to the smallest length. However,
as the microscopic zooming nears, and then passes 10-32 cm, one would
observe space beginning to writhe, ever so slightly at first, and then more
and more violently until, at a region just 10-33 cm in size, space would turn
seething with enormous energy. This fifth level is indeed the Planck length
of 10-33 cm. Such a spatial dimension is small beyond our wildest
imagination: it is a millionth of a billionth of a billionth of a billionth of a
centimeter -magnitudes at the level of quantum vacuum. To get a sense of
this size, we magnify an atom to the size of the known universe; then the
Planck length would barely be the height of an average tree.
     However, as we recede from the level of Planck size back to more
ordinary distances in reverse direction, the random, violent small scale
undulations cancel each other out and the smooth space of the fabric of the
universe once again becomes apparent. It is like looking at a dot-matrix
picture. From far away, the dots which compose the picture blend together
and create the impression of a smooth image. But when we inspect the
picture on finer distance scales, we realize that it markedly differs from its
smooth, longdistance appearance. It is nothing but a collection of discrete
dots, each quite separate from the others. We become aware of the discrete
nature of the picture only when we examine it on smallest scales; but seen
from a distance, it looks smooth and continuous. Similarly, the fabric of
space-time appears smooth except when examined on ultra-microscopic
scales. This is why the general theory of relativity works on large enough
distance (and time) scales — the scales relevant for many typical
astronomical phenomena — but it is not applicable on shorter distance
scales and shorter intervals of time. Greene says: “The central tenet of a
smooth and gently curving geometry is justified in the large but breaks
down due to quantum fluctuations when pushed to the small.”111 Such is
the regime of quantum vacuum.112
   Figure 16. Sequential magnification of a region of space
    [Courtesy: Brian Greene, The Elegant Universe (figure
                         modified)]
      Incidentally, there is a very interesting subplot to the story of
quantum vacuum. In a strange twist in the history of physics, particle
physicists found that quantum vacuum has some affinity with the cosmic
repulsive force represented by Einstein's cosmological constant. His
cosmological model of the universe required a constant which represented
such a repulsive force. Like the vacuum, this force is also the energy of
empty space. When Einstein applied his general theory of relativity to the
universe, he found that solutions to the equations suggested that space was
either expanding or contracting, but not static. In order to make his model
of the universe static, Einstein proposed an ‘anti-gravity' or cosmic
repulsive force that would exactly balance the attractive force of gravity of
all matter in the universe. The cosmological constant inserted into the
equations represents this repulsive force. It is designated by the Greek
letter ‘A' ‘lambda.' Hawking comments:

       Einstein introduced the new ‘antigravity' force, which, unlike
       other forces, did not come from any particular source, but was
       built into the very fabric of space-time. He claimed that
       spacetime has an inbuilt tendency to expand, and this could be
       made to balance exactly the attraction of all matter in the
       universe, so that a static universe would result.113

The cosmological constant describes the strength of repulsive force. It
would be zero on small scales, but would increase as a function of
distance. Such a force is extremely small on the scale of the solar system,
but it produces a huge cosmic repulsion on a large scale.114

     However, from the perspective of quantum physics, the cosmic
repulsive force can be produced by the energy density of quantum vacuum.
Paul Davies says: “The key to understanding the re-discovered cosmic
repulsion is the nature of the quantum vacuum.”115 Although a region of
space can in principle be emptied of all matter, as we saw, this vacuum
contains a residual energy. For, Heisenberg's uncertainty principle does not
permit empty space -- the vacuum -- to be totally quiescent. Rather, it is
believed to be a seething sea of ‘vacuum fluctuations.' The various fields
that inhabit the universe are subject to continuous quantum fluctuations
that give an energy density even to nominally empty space. The vacuum
energy of empty space is thus a direct function of all fields and particles in
the universe. The vacuum energy density is assigned a value proportional
to its strength; this value represents the cosmological constant from the
point of view of quantum physics. It is not a simple quantity, but it is a
composite value that contains a very large number of contributing factors.
In this way, the general theory of relativity and quantum physics admit the
energy of empty space — of the quantum vacuum.116

      Now comes the greatest twist in the story of quantum vacuum. Unlike
the cosmic repulsive force, the energy of vacuum is enormously gigantic!
Davies says: “The quantum vacuum behaves exactly like the previously
hypothetical medium which produces cosmic repulsion, only this time the
numbers are so big that the strength of the repulsive force is 10120 times
greater than Einstein needed to prop up a static universe.”117 Similarly,
Weinberg remarks: “But, with any reasonable guess . . . , the vacuum
energy per volume comes out to be enormously large: it is about trillion
trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion times
larger than is allowed by the observed rate of expansion of the
universe.”118 All studies on the behaviour of elementary particles and
energy fields existing in the universe predict that the value of
cosmological constant is extremely high — about 10120 times bigger than
its actual value based on the data of the expansion of the universe. In other
words, astronomical observations of the rate of expansion of the universe
show that the cosmological constant is amazingly small — smaller by a
factor of 10-120 than the predicted energy of the quantum vacuum.119
Smolin opines: “Quantum theory - in particular, the uncertainty principle -
appeared to require a huge cosmological constant.”120 Although there is
such an enormous disparity between the values of cosmological constant
and the quantum vacuum, physicists agree “that quantum theory had
something to say about the cosmological constant.”121 Davies concludes:
“Both relativity theory and quantum theory, for different reasons and in
different ways, unequivocally declare that empty space, or the vacuum,
has structure.”122 Truly, these theories do agree on the energy of the empty
space, that is, of quantum vacuum.

     Indeed, the metamorphosis of Newtonian empty space into the
fullness of quantum vacuum is far beyond physicists' wildest dreams:
from empty space through space-time warpage to quantum vacuum. We
conclude with astronomer J. McKim Malville:

       We have progressed an awesome distance from that passive
       and flat emptiness [Newtonian space] which used to lie
       between the atomic things of the world. The things are no
       longer things and the void is no longer empty. That inter-
       atomic void, free of matter and energy, once looked as smooth
       and featureless as the unblemished surface of a quiet pond.
       But now it appears that below its tranquil surface there
       simmers all the violence of the larger world, reduced in scale
       and increased in frequency.123

3.3.2.2. Quantum Vacuum Fluctuation

      The essential property of the quantum vacuum is its fluctuation -
quantum fluctuation. The vacuum is nothing if it does not fluctuate. It is
not a passive entity like Newton's empty space; the latter is eternally at
rest. However, in quantum mechanics, Heisenberg's uncertainty principle
does not permit empty space -- the vacuum -- to be at rest; it fluctuates -
even violently at shorter distances and smaller time intervals. It is
regarded as a turbulent whole of fluctuations and a ferment of quantum
activity. John Wheeler says: “No point is more central than this, that
empty space is not empty. It is the seat of the most violent physics.”124
Such restless vacuum activity goes on all around us, including in the space
between atoms of ordinary matter. Apparently, inert vacuum is a sea of
frenetic activity, full of ghostly particles which appear, interact and
vanish.
      We obtain a preliminary notion of vacuum fluctuation by comparing
it with Newtonian dynamics. Consider, for instance, a very elementary
physical system -- the simple pendulum. According to Newton's
mechanics, its vacuum state or its lowest energy state would be just that in
which the pendulum is at rest and at bottom. (Newtonian law of inertia
allows it). But if it is a ‘quantum pendulum' (empty space or vacuum in
the present context), Heisenberg's uncertainty principle does not permit it
to be at rest; for then we would both know where the quantum pendulum is
(at bottom), and what it is doing (it is at rest). If empty space is exactly
still, it has a definite position and momentum; and this violates the
uncertainty principle which states that we cannot know both these
quantities about a quantum state at the same time. Hence, even in the most
quiescent setting imaginable, there would be a tremendous amount of
activity going on in an empty region of space or vacuum; and this activity
gets increasingly violent and agitated at ever smaller distance and time
scales. This is called ‘quantum fluctuation' which is a temporary change in
the state of vacuum, allowed by uncertainty principle; and in fluctuating,
the vacuum ‘officiates' at the creation of particles and anti-particles, and
their mutual annihilation. “A vacuum fluctuation consists of a particle and
its anti-particle springing into virtual existence at a point in space and then
immediately annihilating each other.”125 In vacuum fluctuation, particles
and anti-particles are created from the energy of the vacuum; and in an
extremely short period of time, they mutually collide and convert
themselves into energy according to Einstein's equation of mass/energy
conversion E = mc2. Capra writes: “The relation between the virtual
particles and the vacuum is an essentially dynamic relation; the vacuum is
truly a ‘living Void,' pulsating in endless rhythms of creation and
destruction.”126

     In fact, one of the first successes of relativistic quantum field theory
was the prediction of the creation and annihilation of particles and anti-
particles. David Bohm says: “A quantum field theory can account for the
observed, well-studied creation and annihilation of particles and [anti-
particles], processes that do not exist in quantum mechanics.”127 The
existence of anti-particles was predicted by the great quantum physicist
Paul Dirac. He invented a relativistic wave equation (which now bears his
name) that is obeyed by the electron. When Dirac solved his equation, he
found that besides describing an electron, the equation had additional
solutions that described another particle with an electric charge opposite
to that of electron. At the time Dirac made this observation, the only
known particle with this property was proton. Since he did not want to
proliferate the number of particles, Dirac suggested that the additional
solutions to his equation referred to proton. But after more careful
investigation, it was found that the particle in question has precisely the
same mass as that of electron; this ruled out proton which has a mass of
about 1,836 times the electron's mass. Hence, the particle had to be a
completely new one with the same mass as that of electron, but with
opposite charge — an anti-electron. This particle, now called ‘positron,'
was experimentally discovered by Carl Anderson in 1932 in cosmic rays
raining down on the Earth. Pagels comments: “Soon it was realized by
physicists that the Dirac equation, in implying the existence of the anti-
electron, [positron] was offering but one specific example of the general
consequence of combining quantum theory with the principle of relativity
-- namely, the existence of antimatter.”128

     In general, quantum vacuum fluctuation consists in the creation of
particles and anti-particles out of the vacuum and their annihilation. The
key to this interaction is Heisenberg's uncertainty principle. Malville
explains:

       Even a perfect vacuum, free of all matter and energy, contains
       fluctuations of fields and particles. Quantum uncertainty
       allows small amounts of energy to appear out of the vacuum,
       provided they disappear in a very short time. This energy may
       take the form of short-lived pairs of particles and anti-
       particles, for example an electron-positron pair. Out of the
       vacuum electrons, positrons, and photons and their anti-
       particles emerge spontaneously, existing for an extremely
       short time before they annihilate each other.129

Similarly, Greene says:
       Quantum uncertainty implies that the energy in the field -even
       in an empty region of space - fluctuates up and down, with the
       size of fluctuations getting larger as the distance and time
       scales on which the region is examined gets smaller. The
       energy embodied in such momentary field fluctuations can
       then, through E = mc2, be converted into momentary creation
       of pairs of particles and their antiparticles, which annihilate
       each other in great haste, to keep the energy from changing,
       on average.130

     Now in the case of quantum fluctuation, the uncertainty principle
concerns the mass of a virtual particle and the length of time that it can
remain in existence. Heavy particles which need more energy for their
creation exist only for an extremely short period of time, whereas lighter
particles requiring less energy for their production survive for a longer
time. For example, lighter virtual electronpositron pair will survive for
about 10-21 sec before the two particles disappear in mutual destruction.
Heavier virtual proton and virtual anti-proton, on the other hand, will
vanish after 10-24 sec.131 Creations and annihilations of particles and anti-
particles take place in the case of all forms of fluctuations - of
electromagnetic, weak and strong force-field fluctuations. Such
fluctuations have been confirmed by countless experiments. Physicists
have observed such quantum fluctuations in laboratory down to distances
of about 10-16 cm and over times of about 10-26 sec.




        Figure 17. Annihilation of electron-positron pair
      The figure above is a Feynman diagram of the collision of an electron
and a positron. An electron on left side approaches a positron which is
coming from right side. At their point of contact at the center, they
mutually annihilate each other, and two photons (marked by broken lines)
are created which depart in opposite directions at the speed of light. In
fact, this unceasing dance of creation and annihilation ever goes on among
subatomic particles.

      However, this process of quantum fluctuation involving the creation
and annihilation of particles and anti-particles apparently violates one of
the most fundamental laws of classical physics, namely, the law of the
conservation of energy. This law states in effect that the quantity of energy
in the universe remains constant; and that the total amount of energy is
preserved even though its spatio-temporal distribution changes. This
means that “no quantity of energy in the world can arise out of nothing,
but only from the transformation of a previous energetic equivalent” and
that “no particular quantity of energy can disappear without being
transformed into its equivalent.”132 In other words, energy cannot be
created or destroyed. Now, let us imagine that this law of energy
conservation is checked by an energy accountant who keeps track of the
total energy of physical interactions in the universe. The accountant's
ledger records energy incomes and energy expenses in two columns, and
both columns have to balance exactly. For example, the chemical energy
stored in petroleum can be transformed into heat and motion of cars. There
should be an exact balancing of energy on both sides in this process. In
this way, an energy balance sheet would account for all the
transformations of chemical energy and all other forms of energy. That is
the requirement of the law of conservation of energy. Thus according to
this law, energy is neither created nor destroyed but rigorously conserved,
merely being converted from one form to another.

     Now, if according to the law of energy conservation, energy is neither
created nor destroyed, how then can we explain the creation and
annihilation of particles and anti-particles in quantum vacuum
fluctuation? Heisenberg's uncertainty principle provides us the answer.
This principle can suspend the law of conservation of energy for an
extremely short period of time; and this is the consequence of uncertainty
relation between energy and time. Accordingly, there is an uncertainty in
the measurement of the conjugate quantities of energy and time. If we
know the energy state of a particle with precision, then we are not certain
about the amount of time it is likely to remain in that state. Conversely, if
we know precisely the length of time a particle has been in that state, we
would be uncertain about the energy needed to remain in that state. Hence,
there is a limit to the accuracy with which we can measure energy of the
quantum state of a particle within a given interval of time. Such
uncertainty between energy and time implies that the law of the
conservation of energy can be suspended for a very short period of time;
and the uncertainty of time interval can be ‘exploited' for different energy
needs. During this brief duration, energy can be ‘borrowed' for different
purposes, for instance, to create particles and anti-particles. They emerge
by borrowing energy from the vacuum, and within an extremely short
time, they ‘pay the debt back' by mutual annihilation and disappear. That
is to say, the uncertainty between energy and time allows a system's
energy to go into ‘debt,' provided the debt is rapidly ‘paid back' within the
limits of time permitted by uncertainty principle. Thus, energy can be
borrowed for creating particles and anti-particles if it is paid back by their
mutual annihilation within an extremely short period of time. Particles and
anti-particles so produced will be short-lived because the energy tied up in
them has to be ‘repaid' after a very minute fraction of a second. Since
these particles do not have a permanent existence, they are called ‘virtual'
particles.

     The quantum process of creation and annihilation of particles and
anti-particles can be illustrated by the example of a compulsive borrower
who goes from friend to friend asking for money. The shorter the time for
which a friend can lend him/her money, the larger the loan s/he seeks.
Borrow and return, borrow and return; over and over again with untiring
intensity, s/he takes in money only to give it back in shorter and shorter
intervals as the amount of money s/he seeks gets bigger and bigger. Like
wild fluctuations of stock prices in share market on a roller-coaster day,
the amount of money the compulsive borrower possesses at any given
moment goes through extreme fluctuations. But when all his/her
borrowing and paying back is over, an accounting of his/her finances
shows that s/he is no better off than when s/he began. The borrower's
financial condition is safe even if s/he had borrowed a big sum since s/he
had paid back within the briefest period of time. Similar wild fluctuations
are occurring constantly at microscopic distances and time intervals. The
uncertainty principle permits energy to be borrowed from the quantum
vacuum provided the debt is rapidly paid back. Such is the vacuum
fluctuation of creation and annihilation of particles and anti-particles.
Richard Feynman once jested about this frantic process of quantum
fluctuation: “Created and annihilated, created and annihilated — what a
waste of time.”133

     Since the creation and destruction of particles on the average cancel
each other out, an empty region of space looks calm and placid when
examined except on microscopic scale. Further, in our everyday
experience, space appears empty only because vacuum fluctuations take
place over extremely short time and distance scales. Over longer distances
and times, the vacuum appears serene and smooth — like an ocean which
appears quite smooth when we fly high above it in an aircraft. But if we
travel in a small boat on the surface of the ocean observing it at close
range, we see big waves, high and fluctuating. Malville writes:

       Thus, superimposed upon the large scale geometry of space of
       familiar experience are random quantum fluctuations like
       small ripples on large waves. In everyday circumstances, the
       fluctuations in the geometry of space and time are not
       noticeable; only at a submicroscopic scale do these
       fluctuations become significant.134

Thus, the vacuum fluctuation of creation and destruction of quantum
particles is observable only at extremely short distances and times. Even
at the level of atoms, these fluctuations are exceedingly small, though
observable. The electromagnetic vacuum fluctuations are well understood
and are confirmed by experiments.
      However, gravitational vacuum fluctuations have not yet been
observed experimentally. Because it is an extremely weak force -by far the
weakest of the four forces of nature — gravity does not manifest its
quantum nature at macroscopic domains, or at the scale of atoms or even
of atomic nuclei where quantum properties of other forces are apparent.
Gravitational fluctuations become manifest only at the Planck length of
10-33 cm and the Planck time of 10-43 sec. These fluctuations involve the
quantization of gravitational field since at these Planck scales quantum
effects begin to be felt on account of Heisenberg's uncertainty relation.
The quantization of gravity means the quantum mechanical treatment of
space-time regime because the general theory of relativity describes
gravitation as the curvature of space-time. Greene speaks about the severe
effects on space at Planck scales wrought about by the fluctuations of
spacetime fabric: “The notion of a smooth spatial geometry, the central
principle of general relativity, is destroyed by the violent fluctuations of
the quantum world on short distance scales.”135 Such vacuum fluctuations
of space-time fabric take on frothing, turbulent, twisted forms in which
millions of tiny ‘bubbles' with different shapes are continually ‘bursting'
as new ones are formed. At these extremely small Planck dimensions, the
geometry of space is not well-defined; instead, it has probability for any
conceivable form. Indeed, this is the regime of quantum gravity.

     As we come to the end of the present chapter, “The Quantum Field
Theories,” we make some observations on the immutability/ mutability of
matter occasioned by these theories and Dirac's discovery of the creation
and annihilation of particles and antiparticles. Throughout the centuries
and even in modern times, matter was thought to be unchangeable and
immutable. Molecules could be altered, and atoms could decay by
radioactive processes, but the fundamental particles were believed to be
unchanging. Before the invention of relativistic quantum field theories, the
fundamental constituents of matter were considered to be elementary units
which were indestructible and unchangeable. The basic question was
whether one could divide matter again and again indefinitely, or whether
one would finally arrive at some smallest indivisible units. This scenario
is bound to remain paradoxical as long as one adopts the static view of
composite objects as consisting of basic building blocks. Only when seen
from the dynamic view of relativistic quantum field theories does the
paradox disappear.

     With the advent of these theories and with Dirac's discovery of the
creation and annihilation of particles and anti-particles, the whole question
of the division of matter into smaller particles appears in a new light. The
only way to divide subatomic particles further is to smash them together
in collision processes employing high energy particle accelerators. In this
way, we can divide particles again and again, but we never obtain smaller
pieces because we just create particles out of the energy involved in the
process. Thus, when two particles collide with high energies, they
generally break into pieces, but these pieces are not smaller than original
particles. They are created out of the energy of motion (kinetic energy)
involved in collision, and also are of the same kind as original particles. In
such a scenario, the energy of two colliding particles is redistributed to
form a new pattern, and if there is sufficient amount of kinetic energy, this
new pattern may produce additional particles. Most of the particles created
in these collisions exist for only an extremely short time after which they
disintegrate again. In spite of their exceedingly short life time, these
particles can be detected in cloud chambers and their properties measured;
they actually leave their tracks which can be photographed.

     When, for instance, highly energetic cosmic rays hit the atmosphere
of the Earth, they collide with the nuclei of air molecules and produce a
great variety of secondary particles which either decay or undergo further
collisions, thus creating more particles which collide and decay again until
the last of them reach the Earth. The same phenomena can be observed in
the collision experiments of high energy physics. The high energy
scattering experiments of the past decades have shown us the dynamic and
ever-changing nature of the particle world in the most striking way. Capra
rightly remarks: “Matter has appeared in these experiments as completely
mutable. All particles can be transmuted into other particles; they can be
created from energy and can vanish into energy.”136 Indeed, quantum
physics has taught us the great truth about the mutability of matter: that
subatomic particles are fundamentally mutable. Pagels aptly says: “The
mutability of matter became the cornerstone of the new particle
physics.”137 The whole problem of dividing matter is thus resolved in an
unexpected manner.

    We conclude the present chapter with a quote from the great
Heisenberg who beautifully summarizes the paradigm shift in physics
from immutability of matter to its mutability:

       I believe that the discovery of particles and antiparticles by
       Dirac has changed our whole outlook on atomic physics. . . .
       Up to that time I think every physicist had thought of the
       elementary particles along the lines of the philosophy of
       Democritus, namely by considering these elementary particles
       as unchangeable units which are just given in nature and are
       always the same thing, they never change, they never can be
       transmuted into anything else. They are not dynamical
       systems, they just exist in themselves. After Dirac's discovery
       everything looked different, because one could ask, why
       should a proton not sometimes be a proton plus a pair of
       electron and positron and so on? . . . Thereby the problem of
       dividing matter had come into a different light.138
                                      4
 THE STANDARD MODEL OF PARTICLE PHYSICS
       If paradise is the state of ultimate and perfect symmetry, the
       history of the ‘big bang' resembles that of ‘paradise lost' . . .
       The result is the varied universe of broken symmetry that now
       surrounds us.

                       –John Barrow and Joseph Silk,
                         The Left hand of Creation

     The quantum field theories discussed in the previous chapter --
quantum       electrodynamics,      electroweak      theory    and    quantum
chromodynamics - attempt to unify the special theory of relativity with
quantum physics; and the quantum theory of gravity proposes to integrate
the general theory with quantum mechanics. These theories interpret the
forces of nature in terms of particle interactions. These particles include
exchange particles or force-carriers corresponding to every field -- virtual
photons, vector bosons, coloured gluons and supposed gravitons. These are
all virtual particles. Then there are the real, matter particles and their
composites at different levels of physical reality -- atoms, nuclei, hadrons,
right down to quarks and leptons. The quantum world is indeed a particle
zoo. In order to unify these myriad particles and diverse interactions, the
finest quantum physicists in the world had been working hard for decades.
Although they have not yet achieved the final goal of complete unification,
they have proposed a comprehensive model which maps all particles and
their interactions except gravity. It is called ‘the Standard Model of Particle
Physics.' Its present configuration is consistent with, and is confirmed by,
experiments.

4.1. Towards the Standard Model

    The phenomena of nature are distributed over an extremely wide range
of magnitudes — clusters of galaxies, individual galaxies, stars, planets,
living organisms, cells, molecules, atoms and subatomic particles. These
enormous varieties of physical objects are all interrelated and inter-
connected in numerous ways. Physicists tell us that they are constituted by
four elementary particles and four fundamental forces. Our universe and
the cosmic objects therein, from galaxies to atoms, are all given their basic
structure and shape by these subatomic particles which interact with each
other through a different mix of basic forces. These particles are protons,
neutrons, electrons and neutrinos, and the forces are gravitational,
electromagnetic, weak and strong nuclear forces.1 The incredible variety of
the phenomena of nature is apparently the magnificent outcome of the
workmanship of these particles and forces. Now, we may ask, whether the
four forces are just manifestations of a ‘super-force'? Could it be that the
manifold elementary particles and their composite atoms are all
expressions of a ‘super-particle'? Intriguingly, may the super-force and the
super-particle be ultimately unified into a grand totality? Such dreams of
particle physicists to discover ultimate unity in the diversity of
fundamental particles and their interactions have been the source of much
progress in contemporary physics; and it is currently the final goal of their
research. The greatest outcome of this dream is the Standard Model of
particle physics. It represents a great leap forward in our understanding and
comprehension of physical reality. This model succeeds, at least partly, in
unifying and integrating various particles and forces of nature.

     The Standard Model is a remarkably simple and an exceptionally
successful conceptual framework in particle physics. It consists of complex
equations that allow theorists to make very precise predictions. The
predicted value of nearly every quantity of the Model has been confirmed
with stunning accuracy. It is thus the most rigorous theory in contemporary
physics, and it is astonishingly precise and accurate in its predictions. The
Standard Model is the end result of arduous and often frustrating,
theoretical and experimental work of hundreds of renowned particle
physicists around the world. The current formulation was finalized in the
mid-1970s when the existence of quarks was experimentally confirmed.
The history of the Standard Model actually begins in the 1930s with the
development of the physics of elementary particles, and with the discovery
that the different kinds of atomic nuclei are composed of protons and
neutrons. As larger particle accelerators were built and experiments
conducted over the next twenty years, many more fundamental particles
were discovered, each apparently as elementary as protons and neutrons
themselves. By the late 1950s, their count was in the hundreds. In the
1960s, physicists came to believe that most of these particles, including
protons and neutrons, are not elementary. Rather, they are composed of still
more fundamental entities, called ‘quarks.' The triumph of quark theory
was part of a revolution in particle physics which has taken place in the
early 1970s in the understanding of the forces that are at work inside
atomic nucleus. The confirmation of the existence of top quark (1995), of
tau neutrino (2000), and of the Higgs boson (2013) has rendered the
Standard Model more credible and acceptable. It has made intelligible a
great many different pieces of experimental data that had been
accumulating for several decades. In addition to describing and mapping
the particles and forces already discovered, this Model predicted with great
accuracy the properties of the W± and Zo bosons of electroweak theory, and
also the existence of the Higgs boson.

     The Standard Model is actually a set of mathematical formulations
and measurements describing and classifying elementary particles and
interactions between them. It is similar to the way the periodic table of
elements describes atoms, categorizing them on the basis of their
properties. The basic particles of matter are fermions which interact with
each other by exchanging other particles associated with the four
fundamental forces; these particles are the force-carriers, called ‘gauge
bosons.' Thus, the Standard Model classifies elementary particles into
fermions (matter particles) and bosons (force-carriers). Fermions come in
two families, namely, quarks and leptons. The quarks family contains six
quarks (up, down, top, bottom, charm and strange). The leptons family has
six members (electron, muon, tau, and each with their neutrinos), with
electron being the best known of them. The twelve fermions are the
building blocks of matter, and they interact with each other through
fundamental forces. Each force is mediated by one or more force-carriers.
There are four such force-carrying particles (virtual photon, W± and Zo
bosons and gluons); there is also the Higgs boson which confers mass on
particles. (See Table 1) The Standard Model classifies and describes the
properties of these elementary particles.

     The Standard Model of Particle Physics




                    Table 1. Fermions and Bosons
     Further, the Standard Model includes relativistic quantum field
theories which interpret electromagnetic, weak and strong nuclear forces in
terms of particle interactions. In accomplishing this feat, particle physicists
have invented electroweak theory and quantum chromodynamics which
unify the special theory of relativity and quantum mechanics. Pagels says:
“The electro-weak model when taken together (although not unified) with
quantum chromodynamics, the theory of the strong force, make up what
became known as ‘the standard model' of interacting quarks, leptons and
gluons.”2 The first is the Weinberg-Salam electroweak theory which is the
unification of electromagnetic and weak interactions. The second is
quantum chromodynamics which deals with strong quark-binding
interaction; and it explains how quarks bind themselves together to make
protons, neutrons and many other particles. Combined together, these two
quantum field theories can, in principle, account for everything we observe
in the physical world except those caused by gravity.
     The Standard Model is currently the most accurate theory about the
foundations of particle physics. It exhibits a wide range of fundamental
mechanisms of the quantum world, such as gauge symmetry and
spontaneous symmetry breaking. This Model is used as the basis for
constructing more exotic models, like the Grand Unified Theory and the
Theory of Everything which employ hypothetical particles, extra
dimensions and elaborate gauge symmetries. The Standard Model is
believed to be theoretically self-consistent; it has been confirmed by
experiments with stunning degree of accuracy, and has made experimental
predictions with great success. However, it leaves some quantum
phenomena unexplained and falls short of being a complete theory of
fundamental interactions. Hence, it cannot be considered a final theory (a
Theory of Everything) of particle physics. The Standard Model is
incomplete in three respects. First, it does not incorporate gravity and the
principles of the general theory of relativity. Second, the unification of
fields (even without gravity) in the Standard Model itself is incomplete.
Although electromagnetic and weak interactions are unified in electroweak
theory, the strong interaction is not unified with these. As we shall see, a
Grand Unified Theory (GUT) integrating these three interactions has yet to
be successful. Thirdly, the Standard Model employs many free parameters
and constants. No theory with many such parameters which can be freely
chosen can be considered a fundamental theory of nature.3

    We close ‘Towards the Standard Model,' with a memorable quote from
Smolin on the Standard Model of Particle Physics:

       The standard model of elementary particle physics stands as a
       monument to more than a century of continual discovery. In it
       is captured all of our knowledge of the very small,
       accumulated from the invention of electric and magnetic fields
       in the 1840s to the discovery of W and Z particles in the 1980s.
       If it has been difficult to improve on it, this is because it
       represents such a total triumph. In its imperfections, however,
       the standard model also forces us to confront all that was not
       understood during this long period.4
4.2. The Ingredients of the Standard Model

     The Standard Model, we said, deals with the classification and
properties of elementary particles and the dynamics of four interactions.
During the first decades of the 20th century, physicists have discovered five
levels of matter particles, specifically, the molecular, atomic, nuclear,
hadronic, and quark levels, and also leptons like electrons. Molecules are
composed of atoms, atoms made up of nuclei and electrons, nuclei consist
of hadrons, and finally hadrons are constituted by quarks. In general, these
are called ‘fermions.' Quantum field theories brought in also a bundle of
exchange particles or force-carriers which are called ‘gauge bosons.' This
classification of quantum particles into fermions and bosons is based on the
property of their spins. 5

4.2.1. Through Particle Spin to Particle Classification

     Fermions include all elementary particles, such as quarks and leptons
as well as all composite particles like baryons (for example, protons and
neutrons). Gauge bosons consist of exchange particles (photons, W± and Zo
vector bosons, gluons and hypothetical gravitons), and the Higgs boson.
Some composite particles, like mesons and stable nuclei of even mass
number, such as deuterium 2 and helium-4 are also considered bosons. This
classification of quantum particles into fermions and gauge bosons is based
on their spins. Spin is one of the three properties of a quantum particle like
an electron; others are its mass and charge. Spin is the intrinsic form of
angular momentum carried by elementary particles (quarks and leptons),
composite particles (hadrons like protons and neutrons) and atomic nuclei
(like deuterium and helium). Spins of these particles are analogous to the
spins of a macroscopic body, like a tennis ball. But the classical image of a
spinning tennis ball is not fully adequate to describe a spinning subatomic
particle. In some sense, the particle spin is a rotation about the particle's
own axis, but as always in quantum physics, this classical concept has a
limited sense. For, a quantum particle cannot generally be said to spin
about a definite axis; it merely has a certain tendency or potentiality to do
so, and it is the act of measurement that gives the particle a definite axis of
rotation. Further, in the case of an electron, the amount of spin is always
the same, but the electron can spin in one or the other direction, clockwise
or anti-clockwise, for a given axis of rotation. If the electron spins
clockwise on its axis, it is ‘spin-up;' and if it spins counter-clockwise, it is
‘spin-down.' Physicists thus denote these two values of spin by ‘up' and
‘down.'

     The spin of a quantum particle, in special units, takes only discrete
values of 0, 1, 3/2, 2, 5/2, 3 . . . That is, either an integer or a half-integer
value.6 Spin zero means that the top does not spin. Spin indicates a specific
amount of spin, and spin 1 signifies double of this amount and so on. Now,
the division of subatomic particles into fermions and bosons is based on
their spin number. All elementary particles of matter, such as quarks and
leptons, are fermions which possess half-integer spin, like 3/2, 5/2. All the
force-carrying particles (gauge bosons) have integer spins which are either
zero or a whole number - 0, 1, 2, 3, and so on. This is an important
distinction among elementary particles because each set of spinning
particles interacts with other particles very differently. The spin of the
particles deeply affects their properties, especially in the way these
particles behave collectively. For example, the total number of fermions
entering a reaction has to be equal to the total number leaving it; that is,
fermions are conserved. But no such conservation law applies to bosons.

      Further, particle spin is intimately related to the Pauli Exclusion
Principle. The electron spin, for example, can be inferred theoretically
from this principle. The Exclusion Principle was formulated for electrons
in 1925 by the great Austrian physicist Wolfgang Pauli, and later extended
it to all fermions in 1940. In general, this Principle states that two or more
identical fermions cannot occupy the same quantum state within a quantum
system simultaneously. Particles with half-integer spin like fermions obey
this principle. The Exclusion Principle is displayed by electrons which, as
they orbit nucleus, cannot all occupy the same energy state. Thus, not all
electrons in an atom remain in the lowest orbit; once an electron is in a
particular orbit, or in a quantum state, another electron cannot occupy the
same orbit or state. The exclusion of electrons results in mutual repulsions,
and explains why atoms do not collapse if squeezed together. However,
particles with an integer spin, like gauge bosons, are not subject to the
Exclusion Principle. Bosons differ significantly from fermions in so far as
any number of them can occupy the same quantum state. In a laser beam,
for example, countless photons occupy the same quantum state. There is no
limit to the number of photons which can occupy the same quantum state at
the same time.7

     The Standard Model presents the current classification of all
elementary particles: they are the grains of matter (fermions with half-
integer values of spin) and the force-carriers (bosons with integer values).
Fermions are further classified into quarks and leptons. There are six types
of quarks and six types of leptons. This balance “between the two families
is regarded as a significant confirmation of the validity of the standard
model.”8 Quarks combine to form the familiar protons and neutrons. A
proton, for example, is composed of one ‘down quark' and two ‘up quarks'
which are glued together by strong nuclear force. But the strong force does
not influence the second class of fermions, namely, leptons. Leptons
include electrons which hover round nuclei of atoms; other leptons are
electron-like particles, such as taus and muons, and extremely small
particles, namely, neutrinos. Quarks and leptons appear to be fundamental
point-like particles. Leptons, like electrons, can be directly detected, while
quarks exist only as bound up together in particles, like protons and
neutrons.

     According to the Standard Model, bosons constitute another class of
elementary particles which are not composed of smaller particles. These
include gauge bosons, the virtual particles which mediate the fundamental
forces. The Standard Model describes electromagnetic, weak and strong
interactions in terms of mediating gauge bosons. It recognizes four kinds of
gauge bosons: (virtual) photons, W± and Zo vector bosons and gluons.
Photon is the force-carrier of electromagnetic interaction. W bosons
(positive and negative charge) and Zo are gauge bosons mediating weak
nuclear force, and gluons are exchange particles of strong nuclear force.
Then there is the Higgs Boson, the particle that confers mass on quantum
particles. The force-carrier for gravity is supposedly graviton which is
predicted to have a spin value of 2. Moreover, if two quarks which are
fermions with half-integer spin value are bonded together, then the spin
value of the resulting particle (which is the sum of individual spins) would
be an integer, making it a boson. Some fermions, like mesons (for example,
pions and koans) are thus formed, and are also categorized as bosons.
Atoms, like helium-4 which contains 2 protons, 2 neutrons and 2 electrons
also have an integer spin. Hence, they are also considered as bosons. The
Standard Model gained widespread acceptance in the mid-1970s after the
experimental confirmation of quarks.9

4.2.2. The Particle Zoo

     Now, we go in for a detailed description of fermions and gauge bosons
which are basically different in their properties; and so they behave also
differently. Fermions, we said, are matter particles whereas gauge bosons
are exchange particles or force-carrying particles. The Higgs bosons confer
mass on all these particles.

4.2.2.1. Fermions

     Truly, fermions, like quarks and leptons, and their composites are all
that there is in the universe — the ultimate material ‘stuff' from which all
the complex physical objects emerge. They constitute atoms which have
two basic components -- nucleus at the center and the cloud of electrons
around it. While some particle physicists were interested in studying the
electronic properties of atoms, others turned their attention to the nucleus,
the heart of the atom. At first, nucleus, the primary component of atom was
a great puzzle to them. Physicists knew that the tiny core accounted for
most of the mass of atoms, and that it was the location of enormous energy
transformation, as evidenced by radioactivity, that is, the emission of
particles from nucleus. The discovery of proton as a component of nucleus
is credited to the New Zealand physicist Ernest Rutherford. In the year
1917, he proved that the nucleus of hydrogen atom -a proton -- is present in
the nuclei of all other atoms. Then James Chadwick, an English physicist in
1932, discovered another particle; he called it ‘neutron' which was similar
to proton in its properties except that it had no electric charge. With this
breakthrough, it was clear that atomic nuclei were composed of two major
particles — protons and neutrons -- which were bound together into a tiny
region by immense nuclear forces.

      By probing the nucleus with high energy beams of particles, physicists
discovered that protons and neutrons in the nucleus have a definite
structure. These particles arrange themselves into shells, and they jump
from shell to shell just as electrons jump from orbit to orbit around the
nucleus, and release energy. The shifting of positions by protons and
neutrons inside each nucleus signals transitions from one energy level to
another. The observed energy levels of nuclei were hundreds of times
greater than those of electrons swarming around the nucleus. This meant
that the force which binds protons and neutrons together into a tight little
nucleus is many times stronger than the electromagnetic force that binds
electrons to nucleus. In the year 1935, Hideki Yukawa, a Japanese physicist,
discovered this strong nuclear force. He reasoned that just as the
electromagnetic force which binds electrons to the nucleus has an
associated quantum particle (photon), so the strong force also should have
an associated particle; its interaction with protons and neutrons has to be
hundreds of times stronger than photon's interaction with electrons.
Further, the nuclear force associated with this new particle has to act
strongly over only a very short distance because the nucleus is so tiny.
Yukawa concluded that the particle associated with strong nuclear force
was also massive (about 200 times more massive than electron). He called
this particle a ‘meson.' Meson's existence was verified in later experiments.

     Now, just as the electromagnetic force holds together molecules, so
strong nuclear force holds tight hadrons which are subatomic particles
composed of two or more quarks.10 Most of the mass of ordinary matter
comes from two hadrons, namely, proton and neutron in the nucleus of
atoms. These particles are relatively stable in comparison with other
hadrons. Protons and neutrons bind together to build up all atomic nuclei in
the visible universe. Experiments in particle accelerators conducted in the
1960s employing high energy beams of protons to bombard other protons
revealed the existence of hadrons. When a proton beam collides with other
target protons, energy of protons in the beam creates new forms of matter,
namely, hadrons. Neutron and pion were the first hadrons which were thus
discovered. Physicists believe that there is an infinite number of hadrons,
most of them highly unstable, disintegrating in less than a billion billionth
of a second into more stable hadrons. Smashing protons with high energy
proton beam, as was done at particle accelerator at CERN, Geneva, did not
reveal a simpler structure. Instead, it produced still more hadrons. It was
evident from these experiments that hadrons have a definite extension in
space unlike electrons which seem to behave like point-particles. Hadrons,
like protons, were visualized as little balls of bound energy. The hadron-
balls had properties like spin and electric charge, but their interior region
was an unknown territory. The bag model of hadrons successfully accounts
for many observed features of hadrons. It gives an intuitive picture of
hadron structure.

     Now, what is the ‘stuff' of hadrons? “The answer to the riddle of the
hadrons is that the hadrons are quark ‘molecules.'”11 Murray Gell-Mann,
and independently George Zweig, proposed that hadrons were composed of
more fundamental particles which Gell-Mann called ‘quarks.' Quarks are
elementary particles which combine to form composite particles called
‘hadrons;' the most stable hadrons are protons and neutrons, the
components of atomic nuclei. Hadrons are visualized as tiny bags with
point-like quarks, trapped permanently inside. Each hadron can be viewed
as made up of a few quarks orbiting around each other in a specific
configuration. Since quarks can orbit in an infinite variety of different
configurations, there is actually an infinite number of hadrons. Thus,
quarks are the constituents of hadrons, and they interact through strong
force. They are point-particles similar to electrons with the same spin
value. However, they have only a fractional electric charge compared to
electron's one unit of charge, and unlike an electron, no one has ever
observed a quark. There are six types of quarks, as we have mentioned, and
these types are known as ‘flavours' of quarks. The flavours are up, down,
strange, charm, top and bottom. (See Table 2) There are also anti-particles
of quarks -- anti-quarks. Quantum chromodynamics mathematically
describes how quarks bind together so tightly that they become
permanently confined to hadrons.

Name       Symbol Approximate mass in             Electronic charge in
                    units of the electron's        units of proton charge
                    mass
Up
quark          u                   2                          2/3
Down
quark          d                   6                          -1/3
Strange
quark          s                 200                          -1/3
Charmed
quark          c                3000                          2/3
Bottom
quark          b                9000                          -1/3
Top
quark          t                   ?                          2/3

                            Table 2. Quarks
     Physicists first detected the presence of quarks probing the interiors of
hadrons, like protons and neutrons, employing high energy accelerators.
However, quarks have never been observed as free particles; they seem to
exist only when they are bound together in the form of hadrons. Physicists
have looked for quarks in laboratory experiments, cosmic rays and other
physical states, but without success. If they try to break a hadron apart into
its quarks, like splitting a molecule into atoms, they do not get quarks, but
just more hadrons. The quark model is actually a mathematical ‘fiction'
that somehow works. Most physicists today believe that quarks will never
be directly observed, and that they are permanently trapped inside hadrons.
Quarks do exist, but they always seem to be bound together with other
quarks so tightly that one cannot pull them apart. Sheldon Glashow makes
the following observation about the scientific search for the ultimate
structure of matter:

       If this interpretation of quark confinement is correct, it
       suggests an ingenious way to terminate the apparently infinite
       regression of finer structure in matter. Atoms can be analyzed
       into electrons and nuclei, nuclei into protons and neutrons, and
       protons and neutrons into quarks, but the theory of quark
       confinement suggests the series stops here.12

All scientific evidence supports the view that with quarks, we have reached
the rock bottom of matter.

     Apart from quarks, there is also another class of fermions, namely,
leptons.13 Physicists knew about leptons and their properties for a long
time. In many ways, quarks resemble leptons. They too are point-particles
without a structure, and with one-half spin. But there are significant
differences as to how quarks and leptons appear in nature. Unlike quarks,
leptons like electrons can be directly detected. We can make electron
beams, but not quark beams. Like six kinds of quarks, there are also six
types of leptons: electron, electron neutrino, muon, muon neutrino, tau and
tau neutrino.

      The first family of leptons, the ‘electron family,' consists of electron
and its associated neutrino. These have their anti-particles, namely,
positron and anti-electron neutrino. Electrons were discovered long ago in
1897. Of all elementary particles, they are the best understood. Electrons
are easily freed from their bonds to nuclei, and they have the lightest mass
of all electrically charged particles. They are absolutely stable and do not
decay into other, lighter particles. Electron's anti-particle ‘positron' was
predicted by Dirac equation. The swarm of electrons surrounding atomic
nuclei is responsible for the chemical properties of atoms. Because
electrons are so plentiful in nature and are easily liberated from their bonds
to nuclei, they have been extensively studied and their properties precisely
determined. An electron neutrino, electron's family partner, is extremely
light; it may have zero mass. Because neutrinos have no electric charge,
they do not interact directly with electromagnetic field. They have only
very weak interactions with other forms of matter, and consequently they
fly right through our bodies, the Earth and anything else that gets in their
way.
      The second lepton, the muon, was discovered in 1937. Muons are the
major components of cosmic radiation that swarm through the surface of
the Earth. At this moment, numerous muons are flying around us and
through our bodies. Muon's properties are identical with those of electron
except that its mass is about 207 times greater, and it is negatively charged;
it is actually a ‘fat' electron with negative charge. It is also described by the
Dirac equation, and its interactions are specified with great accuracy by
quantum electrodynamics. The muon's family partner, the muon neutrino,
may have no mass at all. Muon and its neutrino, like the electron family,
have anti-particle partners; the anti-muon has positive charge since muon is
negatively charged. Muons, however, are unstable and are not found
everywhere like electrons. For a long time, physicists thought that electron,
muon, and their associated two neutrinos were the only leptons. As recently
as the year 1977, yet another lepton was discovered. This electrically
charged member is called ‘tau'; it has also an associated neutrino. A tau is
3,491 times more massive than an electron. Presumably, tau also has a
neutrino associated with it, although there is little direct evidence for this.
Because tau is so massive, it can decay into lots of other lighter particles.
The main difference between electron, muon and tau seems to consist in
their masses. If muon is a ‘heavy' electron, then tau is a ‘heavy' muon.

     Finally, there is another family of leptons, namely, neutrinos. In the
1930s, physicists who were studying radioactive decays of nuclei came
across something unexplainable: they found that there was more energy
before the disintegration of a nucleus than after, which is a violation of the
law of mass-energy conservation. Eminent physicist Wolfgang Pauli
suggested that a new elusive particle was carrying off the undetected
energy. Eventually, these particles were discovered. Unlike electron and
muon, these particles have no electric charge. Renowned physicist Enrico
Fermi named them ‘little neutral ones' or ‘neutrinos.' Neutrinos are truly
elusive leptons. They are lighter in mass than electrons; in fact, it is not
clear if they have any mass at all. Their interactions with the rest of matter
are extremely weak. Neutrinos are often produced in the decay remnants of
other particles. For example, muon decays into an electron, a neutrino and
an anti-neutrino. Because it has only very weak interactions with matter, it
is hard to stop neutrinos once they are produced; it takes about eight solid
light years of lead to stop half of the neutrinos emitted in a typical nuclear
decay. Since neutrinos are massless, they travel at the speed of light. As we
saw, there are three kinds of neutrinos: one associated with electron,
another with muon and still another with tau. They are called electron
neutrino, muon neutrino and tau neutrino. (See Table 3)

                     Mass in units of         Electronic charge in units
Name          Symbol electron mass            of proton charge
Electron        e             1                            -
                                                             1
Electron
neutrino         Ve         <0.00012                         0
Muon             H            207                           -
                                                              1
Muon
neutrino        VH             <1.1                          0
Tau              T             3491                         -
                                                              1
Tau
neutrino        VT             <500                          0

                            Table 3. Leptons
     The discovery of tau particles seems to be the end of the lepton story
for now. But many physicists would wager that there are heavier leptons
waiting to be discovered, once machines with energy capable of creating
them are built. But the interesting question is, why do leptons beyond
electrons and its neutrinos exist? For, only electrons are needed to build
atoms. Yet, muons and taus appear to be just as fundamental as electrons.
So far nobody knows why they exist, and why they have the masses they
actually have. However, recently particle physicists seem to think that
muons could lead to new discoveries in the quantum world. The recent
(announced on April 7th 2021) Muon g-2 experiment results from Fermilab
(Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory at Chicago) regarding the
behaviour of muons have in fact created excitement among physicists.
These experiments reported a tiny difference between the predictions of the
behaviour of muons in the Standard Model, and their actual behaviour in
the giant particle accelerator. Physicists surmise that such a deviation could
be influenced by their interactions with as yet undiscovered particles or
forces. They wonder whether muons' behaviour would lead to the discovery
of a ‘fifth' force.

     With quarks and leptons, we have reached the foundations of the world
of matter. Quarks are real particles trapped inside hadrons, while leptons
exist independently as real particles. But how do quarks interact among
themselves, and so also how do leptons interact? The interactions among
these particles are mediated by yet another set of particles - the gauge
bosons.14

4.2.2.2. Gauge Bosons

      Gauge bosons comprise a class of subatomic particles which are force-
carriers. Interestingly, from the point of view of quantum field theories,
they exist because of gauge symmetry.15 Unlike fermions, two or more
bosons can occupy the same quantum state at the same time. Hence, they
have a spin of 0, 1, or 2. Gauge bosons, in their role as mediators of
interactions between quarks and leptons, can be thought of as quantum
particles which are exchanged between two other quantum particles like a
ball thrown between two ball-players. These bosons have characteristic
coupling strengths in relation to quarks and leptons, which measure their
‘stickiness' -- how strongly they latch on to other particles; that is, the
stickiness of bosons is a measure of the strength of the interaction. That
coupling strength of bosons is proportional to the different charges -
generalizations of the idea of electric charge -- which quarks and leptons
possess. For example, the virtual photon couples to the electric charge of
other particles with the strength proportional to that charge. This means
that the strength of the quantum interactions of bosons depends on the
energy of interacting particles. Thus, quarks and leptons interacting at
relatively low energies available at present day laboratories, experience the
four distinct interactions - gravitational, weak, electromagnetic and strong
interactions; and so the strengths of the four interactions - the stickiness of
their bosons -- are different and so distinct. However, at much higher
energy levels, as at the early stages of the universe, the strengths of four
interactions -- the stickiness of their gauge bosons -- might all become
equal, and the distinctions between them vanish. “The four interactions
might really be the manifestation of but one universal interaction! This
possibility is the basis for a unified theory which has long been the dream
of particle physicists.”16

     As we have seen, according to the Standard Model, each of the four
interactions is mediated by a set of gauge bosons which are exchange
particles or force-carriers.17 The current Model deals with three interactions
except gravity. These interactions are mediated by four types of gauge
bosons - virtual photon, W± and Zo vector bosons and gluons. Virtual
photon is the gauge boson associated with electromagnetic interaction
between charged particles. Elementary particles, like electrons and protons,
interact with one another by exchanging virtual photons. According to this
theory, two electrons repel one another because virtual photons pass back
and forth between them. The outcome of this interaction is that the two
electrons are pushed away from one another. The weak interaction plays a
role in the disintegration of elementary particles. Only a small number of
subatomic particles, such as photon, electron, proton and neutrino, are
stable. Other particles, like muons, neutrons and other hadrons, disintegrate
rather rapidly into stable ones. Such particle decay is governed by weak
interaction. Unlike electromagnetic and gravitational interactions which
can have long-range effects, the weak interaction has extremely short
range. The electromagnetic and weak interactions used to be considered
separate. But at present they are interpreted as unified electroweak
interaction mediated by a set of gauge bosons, consisting of a photon which
is the exchange particle of electromagnetic field, and three weak vector
bosons -electrically charged, W+ and W- and a neutral one, Z°. These are
the electroweak gauge bosons.

   Name         Couples to          Role in quantum interactions
                                Gravity; binds planets to the Sun, and
 Graviton          Mass                   stars to the galaxy
                  Electric         Electromagnetic waves; binds
  Photon          charge                 electrons to nucleus
  Weak Weak, flavour                Radioactive decay processes of
 bosons      charge                      hadrons and lepton
W +, W, W 0
Coloured    Coloured                  Strong force; binds quarks
 gluons      charges                  permanently inside hadrons

                         Table 4. Gauge bosons
     Quarks are bound together in hadrons by a set of gauge bosons which
are so strong that quarks can never come apart. This is the domain of strong
nuclear force. The quantum field theory that deals with quark-binding
bosons, we saw, is quantum chromodynamics. According to this theory,
quarks (up and down, top and bottom, strange and charm) come in three
primary ‘colours'-- red, blue or green. The ‘colour' of quarks here refers to
a new set of charges. For example, there are red up quarks, blue up quarks
and green up quarks. Then, there is a set of eight ‘coloured gluons' that act
as strong quark-binding forces. Quarks interact with each other through
these coloured gluons. That is, these particles interact and exchange colour
charges among quarks; they also interact among themselves exchanging
their colour charges. According to quantum chromodynamics, coloured
gluons bind quarks together into little bound systems that can be identified
with observed hadrons.18 In fact, the overwhelming majority of particles are
strongly interacting particles. Only photon and four leptons (and their
antiparticles) do not participate in the strong interactions.

4.2.2.3. The Higgs Boson

     The Higgs boson, like other gauge bosons, is a particle associated with
a field called the ‘Higgs field.' However its function and interaction with
particles are different from those of other gauge bosons (photons, W± and
Zo bosons and gluons). It is not a force-carrying particle, but rather, it is a
‘mass-carrying' particle; it confers mass on particles. Further, the Higgs
boson is different from other gauge bosons in so far as the Higgs
mechanism does not result in anything resembling a force, like the
electromagnetic, strong and weak forces. Particle physicists believe that all
of space is filled with ‘Higgs field' which is a background sea of virtual
Higgs bosons that pop in and out of existence. Quarks, leptons and W± and
Zo bosons moving in space interact with this field, and acquire their
masses. Photons and gluons do not interact with Higgs field, and so they do
not have mass. Even the Higgs boson itself interacts with Higgs field and
confers mass on itself.

     The need for Higgs mechanism arose in connection with the invention
of electroweak theory. By around 1960, all attempts to invent a field theory
for weak nuclear force (more precisely an electroweak theory) had
consistently failed. The existent theories predicted that gauge bosons of
weak force (W± and Zo) should have zero mass. But experiments confirmed
that they have nonzero mass. This meant that something unknown was
giving these particles their masses. In 1964 along with five physicists,
Peter Higgs published papers showing that the electroweak symmetry
would be ‘broken' if an unusual type of field existed throughout the
universe; and this field would generate mass for subatomic particles. The
hypothetical field was called the ‘Higgs field,' and the method by which it
achieves symmetry breaking, was designated the ‘Higgs mechanism.' This
mechanism required that a spinless boson should exist with properties as
described by the Higgs mechanism theory. This particle was called the
‘Higgs boson.'19 It is associated with the Higgs field. Just as the
electromagnetic field has a quantum particle associated with it, namely,
virtual photon, so the Higgs boson is the particle allied with the Higgs
field. It is predicted to have an enormous mass, much greater than proton
mass. The Higgs boson acquires its own sizeable mass by interacting with
its own field. It is predicted to have zero spin value, and so it is classified
as a boson.

     A key feature of the Higgs field is that it would take less energy for it
to have a non-zero value than a zero value; and so unlike all other known
fields, the Higgs field has a non-zero value everywhere. This non-zero
value would break electroweak symmetry, thereby generating mass for
vector bosons, W± and Zo. Thus, the Higgs theory demonstrated how gauge
bosons of weak interaction could have mass. Accordingly, the Standard
Model requires the Higgs field in order to break electroweak symmetry and
to confer on vector bosons their appropriate masses. In general, the Higgs
mechanism explains how subatomic particles, such as electrons and quarks,
acquire their masses. Strictly speaking, the Higgs boson does not confer
mass to other particles. Rather, the Higgs boson is a quantized
manifestation of the Higgs field that generates mass through its interaction
with other particles. The amount of mass these particles obtain depends on
how strongly they couple to the Higgs field. A photon does not interact
with the Higgs field at all, and so it has no mass. In contrast, the W± and Zo
particles acquire their very considerable mass by coupling to the Higgs
field. Quarks couple to the Higgs field much more strongly than electrons;
the top quark ‘feels' it most, and attain a mass hundreds of thousands of
times greater than an electron.

      Although the existence of Higgs field was predicted in 1964, it was far
from easy to confirm it. It can be proved to exist by detecting its excitation
which is manifested as the Higgs boson. But it is extremely difficult to
produce and detect the Higgs boson on account of the enormous amount of
energy required to create it. Hence, it took more than 30 years (1980-2010)
to develop particle colliders, detectors and computers capable of searching
for the Higgs boson. It involved the construction of one of the world's most
expensive and most complex experimental facilities to date, CERN's Large
Hadron Collider (LHC), in order to produce Higgs bosons for observation
and study. On 14th March 2013, physicists working at the LHC announced
that they have discovered particles with the predicted properties of the
Higgs boson and also the associated Higgs field. Thus, the concept of some
type of Higgs field spread throughout space was experimentally confirmed.
However, more investigations are needed to verify with higher precision
that the discovered particle has predicted properties.

     Now, how does the Higgs mechanism actually operate? How does, for
instance, W± and Zo bosons acquire mass? Measurements show that these
gauge bosons do have relatively large masses. In the extremely hot early
stage of the universe, when the temperatures were above the electroweak
phase transition (1015 K), the Higgs field averages to zero. With a zero
average Higgs field, the particle masses also are zero. The W± and Zo
particles too are massless, just like photons, implying that both weak and
electromagnetic forces have long range. When the temperature drops, the
Higgs field accomplishes a trade-off between symmetry and stability. A
zero Higgs field is symmetric but unstable; a non-zero Higgs field is stable
but breaks symmetry. The Higgs field spontaneously breaks symmetry, and
as a result its strength jumps from an average zero value to a very large
non-zero value, triggering the Higgs mechanism. In other words, below the
electroweak temperature of 1015 K, the Higgs field spontaneously breaks
symmetry during interactions. This symmetry breaking triggers the Higgs
mechanism, and the W± and Zo bosons which interact with the Higgs field
acquire their masses. When these bosons thus obtain mass, they are limited
to very small distances. Furthermore, it was later found that the same Higgs
field would also explain, in a different way, how other matter particles, like
electrons and quarks, acquire mass. Remarkably, the observed masses of
the W± and Zo particles accurately agreed with the predictions of
electroweak theory.

     We conclude our visit to the particle zoo with the following remarks.
In the depths of matter, we reached atoms which have two primary
components, namely, nuclei and electrons; we then journeyed on to the
nucleus which is composed of protons and neutrons. These two particles
turned out to be two hadrons out of an infinite number. At the bottom of the
riddle of hadrons lay quarks; these are point-like particles which are bound
together by strong nuclear force into an infinite number of different
configurations; these are hadrons. Our voyage into atomic nucleus thus
ends up with quarks. The other primary component of atom is the swarm of
electrons surrounding the nucleus. The electron is the first member of a
class of particles with spin value, which are called leptons. The other
leptons are muons, taus and elusive neutrinos. Unlike quarks, leptons can
exist in a free state. For example, the electron which is bound to the
nucleus of atom by electromagnetic force can easily be freed. Leptons, like
electrons, really exist out there in the world. Then there are also gauge
bosons - virtual photons, W± and Zo vector bosons, and gluons -- which are
force-carrying particles. The classification of particles ends up with the
Higgs boson.20

4.3. The Mechanisms of the Standard Model
     Related to the Higgs field and the Higgs boson are two key concepts of
the Standard Model of particle physics: they are gauge principle and
symmetry breaking. In fact, the unification of electromagnetic and weak
nuclear interactions is the accomplishment of these two postulates. We
observe breaking of gauge symmetry in the evolution of the universe.

4.3.1. Gauge Symmetry and Symmetry Breaking

     In our discussions on the Higgs boson, we had occasion to refer to the
concepts of symmetry and symmetry breaking. The Standard Model
employs these two key mechanisms in order to unify the diversity of
particles and forces of nature. Smolin explains:

       But the first thing that must be understood about the Standard
       Model is how it resolves the tension between unity and
       diversity. How is it that phenomena as different as
       electromagnetism and the weak and strong nuclear interactions
       can be encompassed within a single theory? The theory
       succeeds in doing this because it is based on two simple ideas,
       which are called the gauge principle and spontaneous
       symmetry breaking.21

The first of these mechanisms, the gauge principle, accomplishes the
unification of forces; and the second, the spontaneous symmetry breaking,
explains why, although unified, the forces are so different. “These two
principles together form the cornerstone of the Standard Model of particle
physics.”22 John Barrow suggests: “The Platonic faith in symmetry and the
implementation of those symmetries as the basis for gauge theories is the
foundation of our knowledge of elementary particle interactions.”23

     Literally, the word ‘gauge' means a measurement, a thickness, such as
the distance between two railway tracks. There are different modes of
measurements or gauges between tracks, like broad gauge and meter gauge.
Though there are different kinds of tracks, there is a law governing them:
they are all parallel. This is the law of symmetry controlling different
varieties of gauges of railway lines. The gauge principle in physics can be
best understood in terms of such symmetry. Barrow says: “Gauge theories,
by their very nature, are built upon symmetry. These symmetries are built
up by operation of a finite number of variations upon a single theme.”24
Pagels expresses this idea differently. “A symmetry has to do with how
some objects remain unchanged or invariant if we transform them.”25 This
means that the gauge principle involves a variety of factors around a single
pattern. It is not merely a law; a law in fact states invariance among
different physical phenomena. For example, the law for calculating force: F
= m x a. It can be used to calculate the forces generated by different kinds
of physical objects in different circumstances, such as the force of a water
fall, of a rock rolling down the hill, or of a running car. It has an invariance
in so far as the same law is applied to different instances of generating
force. However, this invariance is different from the invariance involved in
gauge principle and symmetry. These state an invariance among different
laws; as such, it can be called a ‘super-law.' In that sense, gauge principle
states a proportion, a symmetry or a pattern between different laws. Take
for instance, the simple proportion: 3 x 2 : : 6 x 4. This proportion
comprises both sides of the proportion sign (: :). Whereas the
multiplication sign (x) controls each side of the proportion sign separately,
the proportion sign controls the whole proportion or symmetry. We may say
that a (gauge) field encompasses both sides of the proportion. Here,
proportion or symmetry functions as an invariance. The whole proportion
can be ‘re-gauged' with different statements, but still keeping the
proportion or symmetry, thus: 5 x 4 : : 10 x 8. However, in these ordinary
cases, symmetries are not hidden, but manifest; and also symmetries are
not broken, but they are sustained.

     In the present context, symmetries are to be understood together with
symmetry breaking. Consider, for example, a sharp pencil poised vertically
with its tip on a horizontal surface. It is in a symmetrical state because,
while it is balanced on its point, one direction is as good as any another.
The pencil looks the same and is symmetrical even if it is rotated about a
vertical axis. (See Figure 18) In this state, the pencil manifests the
underlying symmetry of the gravitational field, which is indifferent to
horizontal directions. However, this symmetric state is unstable, and the
pencil will topple down. When the pencil falls, as it inevitably must, it will
fall randomly, in one direction or another, breaking the symmetry. (See
Figure 19). In the horizontal state, the pencil is stable, but its symmetry is
broken; it no longer manifests its symmetry. In other words, the symmetry
of the vertically poised pencil is unstable; the pencil breaks symmetry by
falling to the horizontal state which is stable, but it does not manifest
symmetry. Davies explains: “So the pencil trades symmetry for stability. . .
. When there is such a tradeoff between symmetry and stability like this, it
is called spontaneous symmetry breaking, because the system itself chooses
(arbitrarily) how to break the symmetry -- it is not imposed by some
external influence.”26




                      Figure 18. Rotating pencil
                      Figure 19. Fallen pencil
     Let us take another example -- of a ferromagnet.27 A bar of
ferromagnet consists of numerous micro-magnets. The domains of these
micro-magnets are aligned, thereby combining their magnetic fields in an
orderly way. (See Figure 20) But if it is heated, it will




                   Figure 20. Ordinary magnet




                    Figure. 21. Heated magnet
     soon lose its magnetism: its magnetic domains become disoriented
and start positioning in random directions. The magnetic field of the bar
gets weaker. Eventually when a critical temperature, called the ‘Curie
temperature' is reached, all mini-magnets become independent, and the
magnetic field of the bar vanishes; micromagnets no longer align in a
preferred direction.28 (See Figure 21) Under these circumstances, their
orientations are random: there is no systematic line-up in any particular
direction. The original rotational symmetry for which there is no preferred
direction has been restored. Although the hot iron is made of micro-
magnets, the net magnetic field averages to zero.

     However, if the hot iron bar is now slowly cooled down through the
Curie temperature, the magnetic field returns. At this critical temperature,
the disruptive effect of thermal agitation is suddenly overcome, and all
micro-magnets spontaneously organize themselves into a coherent pattern.
The magnetic fields of component micromagnets add together to produce a
large-scale field. They pick out a particular direction in space and thereby
break the perfect rotational symmetry of space, in which one direction is
equivalent to any other. The basic law of magnetism is symmetric; that is,
the mini-magnets which comprise the bar of magnet are indifferent to
directions in space. The magnetic state of hot iron bar conforms to this
symmetry, and so it has no magnetic field. But below the Curie
temperature, magnetic field spontaneously sets in as each mini-magnet
locks into a particular direction. That is to say, a given magnet breaks
symmetry by picking out a particular direction. The ferromagnet illustrates
the basic ideas of spontaneous symmetry breaking. The symmetrical state
is unstable, but the state of broken symmetry is stable. The general rule
regarding symmetry breaking is the following: “High-temperature systems
manifest more symmetry than low-temperature systems. When the
temperature falls, symmetries get broken.”29 Physicists call this kind of
transformation ‘phase transitions.'30

4.3.2. The       Gauge       Symmetry        (Breaking)      in    Particle
Interactions

     There are many kinds of symmetries in physics. Positive and negative
electrical charges are simple examples of symmetries. They stand in the
same relation as left-right symmetry; if all positive and negative charges in
the universe were magically transposed, the laws of electromagnetism
would be ‘unaware' of the changeover. There is also another kind of
symmetry involved in gauge forces. Smolin writes:

       But there are special situations in which the symmetries
       completely determine the forces. This turns out to be the case
       for a class of forces called gauge forces. . . . But the fact that
       all the properties of a force can be determined by knowing the
       symmetries is one of the most important discoveries of
       twentieth-century physics. This idea is what is meant by the
       gauge principle.31

As physicists came to understand the mathematical symmetries of field
theory, they discovered that these symmetries actually required the very
interactions they had observed among the fields and their associated
particles. Such symmetries are called ‘gauge symmetries.' Gauge
symmetry, Greene says, is “the symmetry principle underlying the
quantum-mechanical description of the three non-gravitational forces; the
symmetry involves the invariance of a physical system under various shifts
in the values of force charges, shifts that can change from place to place
and from moment to moment.”32

     Gauge symmetries are crucial to our understanding of the fundamental
laws of physics at the subatomic level, and they provide us keys to the
unification of the four fundamental forces of nature. Davies comments:
“Hidden symmetry, however, plays an even more important role in physics.
Indeed, much of our present understanding of the fundamental forces of
nature draws heavily on the concept of abstract symmetries that are not
obvious on casual inspection.”33 Likewise, Barrow remarks about the
important role of symmetry in particle interactions:

       Symmetry has become the dominant theme in particle physics.

       . . . Thus, a blind faith in symmetry provides an efficient recipe
       for generating candidate theories of elementary-particle
       interactions. No such machinery exists to generate candidate
       theories to explain the workings of less basic entities like
       economies or weather systems. The stronghold of symmetry is
       the unseen world of the smallest things.34

The best theories about the forces of nature are gauge theories. Most
physicists believe that the unification of three/four interactions would be
achieved only by a gauge theory. Smolin suggests: “The discovery that all
three forces are expressions of a single unifying principle — the gauge
principle — is the deepest accomplishment of theoretical particle physics
to date.”35 Thus, gauge principle has turned out to be one of the most
important insights in contemporary physics and the key to unifying the
forces and particles of nature.

     The mechanisms of gauge symmetry and of symmetry breaking were
most successfully employed in inventing the electroweak theory by Steven
Weinberg, Sheldon Glashow and Abdus Salam. They were investigating
how it would be possible to interpret weak interaction as a gauge field. But
surprisingly, these physicists found that they could not use a single gauge
field for weak interaction alone, but needed a sort of unified field which
describes, not simply the weak interaction but the weak and
electromagnetic interactions combined. This, however, means that two of
the fundamental forces of nature — electromagnetic and weak nuclear
forces — must now be treated in a unified way. Peat describes the scenario:

       Physics had hitherto viewed these forces as quite distinct --
       after all, the weak nuclear force has to do with elementary
       particles, while electromagnetism is an infinitely ranged force
       at our own scale of things -- but now nature was forcing
       physicists to treat these forces as one and the same. The result
       was a single gauge field to describe a new unified electroweak
       force. It turned out that this field has four components, and
       therefore four massless vector bosons, which carry the force.
       Two of these gauge particles have electrical charges, two do
       not. One of the massless vector bosons looks very like our old
       friend the photon.36

Now, what does this discovery of Weinberg, Glashow and Salam mean? It
means that nature “knows only a single gauge field which embraces both
the weak and electromagnetic interactions.”37 However, a host of
experiments showed very clearly that the weak force is different from the
electromagnetic force. It has a strength and range different from
electromagnetism. Peat wryly remarks: “At first sight, the cost of unifying
two of the forces seemed too high. Putting the weak force on an equal
footing with the electromagnetic introduced too much symmetry into the
theory. Nature simply does not look that way.”38

     It was at this point that another powerful idea struck particle
physicists -- that of symmetry breaking. Peat explains: “In essence, this
suggests that while the laws of nature have a high degree of symmetry, their
particular solutions — in other words, the objects we observe in the world
— can have a much lower degree of symmetry.”39 The mechanism to
accomplish this feat is symmetry breaking which is the second key to the
Standard Model. Smolin confirms: “Spontaneous symmetry breaking is the
way that nature contrives to resolve the dilemma of unification and
variety.”40 This is precisely what physicists Weinberg, Glashow and Salam
discovered in inventing the electroweak theory. They found that the
mechanisms of gauge symmetry and spontaneous symmetry breaking can
explain the unity of, and differences between, electromagnetic and weak
interactions. “The basic idea of this remarkable gauge field [electroweak]
theory is that a spontaneous symmetry breaking gives rise to the difference
between the weak and the electromagnetic interactions.”41 Pagels
summarizes the process of symmetry breaking in electroweak interactions:

       But in the case of the weak interactions, broken symmetry is
       just what is wanted to distinguish the electromagnetic from the
       weak interactions. The W and Z fields become very massive
       because of this symmetry-breaking ‘Higgs mechanism,' while
       the photon, which retains a remnant of the original exact
       symmetry, remains massless.42

     As we saw, symmetry breaking takes place when a hot magnet is
gradually cooled, attaining its low energy state; its micro-magnets then
pick out a particular direction in space, and they form a coherent magnetic
field. Thus, the rotational symmetry of the magnet's hot state where its
micro-magnets have no particular directions in space is broken. Similar
dynamics of symmetry breaking is operative in electroweak theory. Peat
explains:

       Physicists speculated that exactly the same thing [gaining and
       losing magnetic field] happens with the weak-electromagnetic
       force. According to the gauge field approach, the weak-
       electromagnetic force is already unified and carried by a
       massless gauge field of infinite range associated with four
       massless vector bosons. However, in this force's lowest energy
       states, its basic symmetry or unity is broken. The weak and the
       electromagnetic forces now assume different strengths, three
       of the four gauge particles acquire mass, while the third, the
       photon, remains massless. It turns out that the two field vector
       bosons W+ and W-, as well as the neutral vector boson Z°,
       assume quite large masses. The result is that, rather than
       having an infinite range, the weak interaction is now of
       extremely short range. However, at very high energies found
       during the first instants of the creation of the universe, these
       two forces of nature appear identical.43

     The essential idea about symmetry breaking is that a general
symmetry is broken or hidden in the lowest energy states, but its full
symmetry can still be manifested at high enough temperatures or energies.
Such high energy has to do with extreme energies far beyond those of our
ordinary experience, comparable to the energies involved during the first
instants of the creation of the universe. At these high energy states, the four
interactions of nature are symmetrical and indistinguishable, but at lower
energy states the symmetry is broken, and they become distinct as in the
present universe. Hence, the dynamics of symmetry breaking involves
different energy states. According to the electroweak gauge field theory, at
high energies, electromagnetic and weak forces are unified and carried by a
massless gauge field of infinite range associated with four massless vector
bosons. These two forces appeared identical at temperatures above 1015 K
at the beginning of the universe, and the underlying symmetry was
manifest. The weak force had a long range like electromagnetic force. In
other words, the two interactions merge their identities at temperatures
above 1015 K.

     Now the question is, how would such a symmetrical state of
electromagnetic and weak interactions come about? How would weak force
acquire infinite range like electromagnetic force? The weak force, we
know, has actually very short range because it is carried by very heavy
bosons -- W± and Zo. Electromagnetism, on the other hand, is carried by
photons which have zero mass. A zero mass virtual particle can live
forever, and so the range of electromagnetic force is, in principle, infinite
whereas heavy particles, like W± and Zo can remain in existence only for an
extremely short time permitted by Heisenberg's uncertainty principle. The
duration of these virtual particles depends on their masses: the more
massive they are, the less time they are allowed to exist; conversely, the
less massive the particles are, the more time they can exist. They have to be
created, exchanged and have to disappear within the time allowed by the
uncertainty relation.

     However, when the universe had enormous energy in its primordial
stages, there would have been many W± and Zo particles which exist
independently by themselves, and would not be restricted by the limits of
uncertainty relation. Gribbin describes this scenario:

       In the very early universe, when there was plenty of energy
       about, there would also have been many W and Z particles, for
       example, existing in their own right. If the energy density of
       the Universe were higher than the energy needed to maintain a
       sea of W and Z particles, then they would not be subjected to
       the constraints imposed today by the uncertainty principle.
       Like photons, they would be massless, and would have infinite
       range, and there would be no way to distinguish between the
       electromagnetic and weak forces.44

Thus, above the electroweak energy of 1015 K, electromagnetic and weak
interactions would become symmetrical; both would have infinite range,
and the vector bosons of the weak force - W"± and Zo particles -- would be
massless like photons.
     But as the temperature fell below 1015 K, there was a phase transition
at which the electroweak gauge symmetry was spontaneously broken.
Consequently, the weak force abruptly became considerably weaker than
the electromagnetic force; it also became very short-ranged, and restricted
to the subatomic domain as at present. In other words, after the electroweak
symmetry was broken, the electromagnetic and weak forces assume
different strengths and became distinct in their properties. Only one of the
four particles -- the photon of electromagnetic interaction -- remained
massless, and the other three particles acquired huge masses (hundreds of
times more than proton mass). They are the gauge bosons of weak
interaction -- W+ and W- and Z° particles. The differing masses of the four
originally massless gauge bosons reflect broken symmetry. Rather than
having an infinite range, the weak interaction has now an extremely short
range. Electromagnetism, on the other hand, has infinite range and is
carried by photons which have zero mass.

     However, the gauge bosons cannot by themselves spontaneously break
gauge symmetry and confer on themselves different masses. These
particles acquire their masses, we have seen, by interacting with the all-
pervading Higgs field which is also responsible for breaking the gauge
symmetry of the electroweak force. The Weinberg-Salam electroweak
model requires that the Higgs field exist with the associated particle -- the
Higgs boson. At temperatures above that of electroweak phase transition
(1015 K), such as prevailed in the hot early state of the universe, the value
of the Higgs field averages to zero. With a zero Higgs field, all the particle
masses are in effect zero. The W± and Zo particles are massless too, just
like photon, and consequently both weak and electromagnetic forces have
long range. When the temperature drops, the Higgs field faces the same
conundrum as the pencil standing on its head: a trade-off between
symmetry and stability. That is to say, a zero Higgs field is symmetric but
unstable, whereas a non-zero Higgs field is stable but breaks symmetry.

     Like the toppling pencil, the Higgs field spontaneously breaks
symmetry. Some of the ‘toppling energy' thus liberated gets used to ‘pay'
for the masses that the Higgs field bestows on the participating particles.
The strength of the Higgs field jumps from a zero average value to a very
large non-zero value; and the W± and Zo bosons which interact with the
Higgs field acquire their masses. When these particles attain large masses,
the weak interaction becomes short-ranged, and limited to a very small
distance. Thus, the gauge field has unified two of the fundamental forces of
nature, whose symmetry is manifest at high energies, and broken at low
energies. In the words of Smolin: “In the weak and electromagnetic
interactions gauge theory acts in a still more interesting way, because it
succeeds in unifying things that are, apparently, quite different. The range
of the electromagnetic force is infinite, while the range of the weak nuclear
force is no more than the diameter of an atomic nucleus.”45 The great
triumph of electroweak theory is the eventual discovery of the gauge field
vector bosons themselves. The first experimental indications of a W boson
were found in 1982, and the Z particle was discovered on 4th May 1983.

     With the unification of electromagnetic and weak interactions
employing gauge symmetry, particle physicists attempted to apply it to
strong interaction acting between quarks. One of great problems of the
1950s with regard to the strong force was now seen in an entirely new light.
So far physicists were trying to account for the strong force in terms of the
exchange of mesons between protons and neutrons; but in the context of
quantum field theories, they began to view it in terms of gluons -- the
virtual particles of the strong force -- being exchanged between quarks.
Experimental physicists had already confirmed that hadrons are made up of
quarks. But what binds quarks together inside hadrons? Physicists reasoned
that these quarks would be bound together by a new set of gauge bosons
whose existence was required by a gauge symmetry. This insight led to the
creation of the quantum field theory of strong interaction - the quantum
chromodynamics. According to this theory, each quark has a new kind of
charge, a ‘colour' charge. Quarks are assigned three charges in terms of
three primary colours - red, blue and green. Thus, instead of just a single up
quark, there are now a red up quark, a blue up quark and a green up quark.
Introducing these three extra charges allows physicists to postulate a new
symmetry among quarks. This symmetry is similar to the rotational
symmetry of a sphere in three-dimensional space; each of the three spatial
directions now corresponds to one of the three colours, red, blue and green.
If the sphere is rotated, different colours are mixed; and then perfect
symmetry means that the three primary colours have to be equally mixed.
An equal mixture of the three colours produces white which is not a colour
at all. Requiring such colour invariance thus implies that only those
combinations of coloured quarks are allowed which when mixed results in
no colour at all. These colourless combinations of coloured quarks
correspond precisely to observed hadrons like protons and neutrons.

      The colour symmetry of quarks is postulated as a gauge symmetry
which requires a new set of gauge bosons or virtual/ exchange particles;
accordingly, there are eight coloured gluons which couple to the coloured
charges of quarks. But unlike photon which does not couple to itself,
because it has no electric charge, the eight coloured gluons do interact
among themselves. The coloured gluons, not only stick to quarks, but they
also stick to each other. The coloured gluons are the real source of strong
interaction. According to quantum chromodynamics, Pagels says, “the
color charges of the quarks coupling to the eight colored gluons is [sic] the
totality of strong interaction physics — all the complexity of hadrons is to
be accounted for by this single idea of a gauge symmetry.”46 The coloured
gluons provide the binding force that traps quarks inside hadrons. Only
those hadrons which are colourless combinations of coloured quarks and
gluons can exist as free particles, and this is just what we observe in the
real world. That is, all the coloured quarks and coloured gluons bind
themselves permanently together into colourless hadrons. This is the gauge
theory of quantum chromodynamics. “Technically, it is a gauge field theory
describing the interactions of quarks and gluons.”47 This theory is
considered a great triumph of the twentieth century particle physics.

     As we conclude our discourse on ‘The Mechanisms of the Standard
Model,' we make some observations on the paramount importance of gauge
principle in quantum physics. Particle physicists are most impressed about
the profound role of gauge symmetry and symmetry breaking in the
dynamics of quantum field theories. They have discovered that these
symmetries apparently determine the nature and properties of the four
interactions and their associated particles. Indeed, the gauge field theory is
a great revolution in particle physics that has given physicists a deep
insight into the structure of physical reality. The great and most successful
fundamental theories of physics - the general theory of relativity,
electroweak theory and quantum chromodynamics -- are all gauge field
theories. Steven Weinberg remarks about the importance of symmetry in
the theories of particle physics: “Even if a theory postulates a high degree
of symmetry, it is not necessary for . . . the states of the particles to exhibit
the symmetry. . . . Nothing in physics seems so hopeful to me as the idea
that it is possible for a theory to have a high degree of symmetry which is
hidden from us in ordinary life.”48 Barrow makes a beautiful observation
about hidden/broken symmetries in the laws of nature:

       We observe the broken symmetries in the particulars of the
       world and from them we must deduce the hidden symmetries
       that characterize the laws of Nature. There is an elegant
       tapestry of Nature of harmonious weave, but we are seeing the
       back of it. From the loose threads we must create a picture of
       the hidden pattern behind it.49

4.3.3. Symmetry Breaking in the Early Universe

     We find the mechanisms of gauge symmetry and symmetry breaking
operative in the evolution of the early stages of the universe. According to
the Standard Model of cosmology, the universe had its origin in the
purported Big Bang singularity. At time zero, the universe supposedly had
infinite energy density, infinite curvature and infinite temperature - a state
known as singularity. If we go back to the first moments of the creation of
the universe, its energies and temperatures were extremely high. In such a
regime, the four interactions were unified as one highly symmetrical super-
force; the four forces of nature were indistinguishable and equivalent to
one another. Pagels tells us:

       It is held today that that all the four interactions become
       unified as one universal interaction at ultra-high energies. The
       reason we see such different interactions is that the familiar
       world we know has its physical processes occurring at low
       energy, and there the strengths of the interactions can be very
       different. The symmetry and simplicity of physics will be
       revealed only at ultrahigh energies. Unified field theories —
       and many have been constructed in the last several years —
       incorporate these features.50

     However, as the universe expanded and temperatures dropped, this
perfect symmetry began to break; and the four interactions split off at
appropriate temperatures and limited themselves to the strengths they have
at present in our universe. According to the proposed unified theories, all
the interactions we observe in the universe are the asymmetrical remnants
of a perfectly symmetrical super-force at ultra-high energies of the Big
Bang regime. “The universe from its very beginning to the present may be
viewed as a hierarchy of successively broken symmetries — a transition
from a simple perfect symmetry at the beginning of time to the complex
patterns of broken symmetries we observe today.”51 Barrow suggests: “Of
necessity, we live in an era when the deep symmetries of Nature have long
since broken and disguised the true simplicity behind things. Moreover,
many of the things that we witness in the Universe may have been
predominantly determined by the random way in which symmetry breaking
just happened to fall out.”52 The history of the universe can therefore be
interpreted as a succession of symmetry breaking as temperature dropped.
The universe started with perfect unity and symmetry, but as it expanded,
more and more symmetries were broken, and more and more structures and
complexities emerged, much of it random and spontaneous.

     Just after the Big Bang itself, physicists believe that there was an era,
called the ‘Planck epoch.' During this period, there was only one ‘super-
force' in which gravity was unified with other three interactions. At the
Planck time scale of 10-43 sec, distance scale of 10-33 cm, temperatures
above 1032 K and energies in excess of 1019 GeV, the four fundamental
forces were unified and gravity was equal to the other forces of nature.
From the Planck time of 10-43 sec, the early universe is believed to have
undergone a series of phase transitions, and passed through a number of
spontaneous symmetry breaking phases; and the four forces were separated.
First, the ‘super symmetry' between gravitational force and other forces
was broken. In the ‘GUT era' -- from 10-43 sec after the Big Bang
singularity to 10-35 sec at the temperature of 1032 K -- the gravitational force
became separated from the strong and electroweak forces. As the universe
began to expand smoothly, and the temperature fell, the other three forces
were still unified. Hawking speaks about the dynamics of these forces at
this stage of the expansion of the universe. He says that “the strong nuclear
force gets weaker at high energies. On the other hand, the electromagnetic
and weak forces . . . get stronger at high energies. At some very high
energy, called the grand unification energy, these three forces would all
have the same strength and so could just be different aspects of a single
force.”53 During the ‘electroweak era' -- from 10-35 sec to 10-10 sec at the
temperature of 1026 K - the strong force was separated from electroweak
force, and it became restricted to the distances we know today in the nuclei
of atoms. Still the electromagnetic and weak nuclear interactions were
united as a single, undifferentiated electroweak force.

     At temperatures above 1015 K, the electromagnetic and weak forces
were symmetrical, and the W± and Zo weak bosons were effectively
massless like photons. But as the temperature dropped below 1015 K, the
electroweak symmetry was broken and the distinction between these two
interactions became manifest. The weak bosons W± and Zo acquired masses
while photons continued to exist as massless. During the ‘free quark era' --
from 10-10 to 10-4 sec with still temperatures falling, the electromagnetic
force became separated from weak force. When this occurred, the
temperature of the universe was equivalent to the highest energies yet
achieved in particle accelerators on Earth. This is one of the reasons why
the electroweak theory has been much more decisively confirmed by
experiments than quantum chromodynamics. Each of these separations is
the breaking of a gauge symmetry of a unified regime of two or more
interactions; and each of the symmetries is broken in a random way.

     After the electroweak symmetry was broken, the universe consisted of
a gas of approximately equal numbers of leptons, quarks, their anti-
particles, coloured gluons and photons which were continuously created
and destroyed. Effectively, the quarks were freely flying about and
interacting with other particles. At high energies, quarks and coloured
gluons behave as if they were free and non-interacting. This property of
these particles is called ‘asymptotic freedom.' At high energy, the strength
which couples coloured gluons becomes weaker; that is, the ‘stickiness' of
gluons decreases. Hence, at temperatures beyond 1014 K, the coupling
strength of strong interaction decreases, and so it becomes weak; the
hadrons literally become unglued and the quarks are freed. However, as the
universe continued to expand and the temperature dropped below 1014 K,
little bags we call ‘hadrons' were formed containing quarks, ‘imprisoning'
them for ever; quarks were trapped in hadrons. This process is called
‘hadronization.' It marks the beginning of the hadron era, with temperatures
from 1014 K to 1012 K. All the hadrons now became part of particles of the
universe, and free quarks and coloured gluons have completely
disappeared. Pagels suggests: “It is as if a color movie (the colored quarks
and gluons) all of a sudden became black-and-white (the hadrons).”54 The
universe today with its relatively low temperature is then the frozen fossils
of the Big Bang regime. These are the grand structures of the universe:
galaxies, stars and the greatest of them all -- life itself.

    We conclude with an interesting quote from Pagels on the fascinating
dynamics of symmetries and symmetry breaking in the universe:
symmetries are restored as we go backward to the beginning of the
universe, and they are broken as the universe evolves to the present time:

       Here, for the first time, we see a remarkable feature of the
       modern theory of the origin of the universe: the further back in
       time we go, the hotter the universe becomes, and broken
       symmetries are restored. The universe and all its particle
       interactions are becoming more and more symmetrical as we
       descend deeper into the big bang. . . . Conversely, were we to
       progress forward in time, we would see that as the temperature
       falls, those perfect symmetries are broken. Now the physical
       differences between the various interactions — strong, weak
       and electromagnetic — become apparent.55

4.4. Beyond the Standard Model

    The Standard Model currently provides the best picture of the
behaviour of elementary particles and fundamental forces. It makes precise
predictions of their properties which have been confirmed by numerous
experiments since it was proposed in the 1960s. However, new discoveries
in particle physics pose challenges to the Model. Further, the present
design of the Standard Model is in fact incomplete. It has yet to unify
electroweak model and quantum chromodynamics into a Grand unified
Theory (GUT). Finally, the Model has to integrate all the forces of nature
including gravitation into a Theory of Everything (TOE).

4.4.1. The Challenges to the Standard Model

     Some unsolved problems in quantum physics and cosmology as well
as new discoveries about the behaviour of quantum particles do pose
challenges to the validity of the Standard Model. This Model has yet to
confront certain important questions in quantum mechanics itself. As we
have seen, it applies only to the three non-gravitational interactions of
nature, but does not include gravity. In order to incorporate gravity with
quantum mechanics, a successful quantum theory of gravity has to be
invented. But in spite of the strenuous efforts of many renowned particle
physicists, the prospects of such a theory at present appear bleak. Further,
the Standard Model contains at least 19 arbitrary parameters. The values of
these parameters cannot be deduced from the Model itself, but have to be
determined through experiments. Moreover, for the most part, the Standard
Model is applicable only to the universe at low energies, that is, the
universe as we ordinarily experience. That is one of the reasons why low
energy theories, like electroweak model, are readily confirmed by
experiments. But the Model is not applicable to the state of the universe at
ultra-high energies, for instance, the Planck regime.

     Another limitation of the Standard Model is that although it is a theory
of fundamental particles and forces of the universe, it fails to explain the
wide range of the masses of elementary particles and huge differences in
the strengths of the four forces. For example, an electron is about 200 times
lighter than a muon and 3491 times lighter than a tau. Similar disparity is
observed regarding the mass of quarks: the top quark is supposedly 75,000
times heavier than the up quark. The differences in the strengths of the four
forces are still more appalling. At low energies as in the present universe,
they are distributed across enormous ranges. These forces have strengths so
varied that the strongest of them (strong nuclear force) is some trillion
trillion quadrillion times stronger than the weakest (gravity). In units in
which the strength of the strong force is 1, that of electromagnetic force is
10-2 (1% of the strength of strong force), and the strength of weak force is
10-6 (one-millionth of the strength of strong force), the strength of gravity
is a mere 10-40.

     Moreover, the Standard Model of particle physics has to explain also
some important problems in cosmology. It accounts only for the observable
regions of the universe, and it has no explanation for the totality of
matter/energy content of the universe. Cosmological theories inform us
that galaxies, stars and inter-stellar material comprise only about 4.9% of
the total contents of the universe. The dark matter constitutes about 26.8%
of the stuff; it is believed to interact only weakly (if at all) with ordinary
matter and quantum fields. The Standard Model does not propose any
elementary particle to explain dark matter. Further, the dark energy
supposedly includes the remaining 68.3% of the contents of the universe; it
is believed to be the energy density of quantum vacuum. However, the
attempts to explain dark energy in terms of the energy of vacuum have
ended up in utter failure. Calculations based on the behaviour of
elementary particles and energy fields of the universe predict that the value
of the vacuum is extremely high — about 10120 times bigger than its actual
value based on the data of the expansion of the universe. The Standard
Model has no adequate explanation for this enormous disparity.
Furthermore, the Model does not account for the preponderance of matter
over anti-matter in the present universe. Like particles, anti-particles are
constituent components of physical reality. The Big Bang model predicts
that matter and anti-matter were created in almost equal amounts at the
beginning of the universe. But our observable universe is composed mostly
only of matter. However, there could be galaxies and stars entirely made up
of anti-matter. Yet, there is no mechanism in the Standard Model to
sufficiently explain the present predominance of matter over anti-matter in
the present universe. Hence, it is generally agreed by physicists that these
fundamental problems in particle physics and cosmology demand a new
physics beyond the Standard Model.
     Apart from these theoretical problems, the Standard Model has to face
challenges from the experimental work in particle physics. The latest
results coming from experiments conducted in different particle
accelerators around the world show that all is not well with the Standard
Model. Increasing number of experiments show that not all measurements
of elementary particles can be explained in the framework of this Model.
The new results from CERN's LHCb (Large Hadron Collider beauty) and
Fermilab (Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Chicago) suggest that
muons do not behave according to the principles of the Standard Model.
LHCb results focus on the violations of the concept of ‘lepton flavour
universality.'56 The Standard Model predicts that decays involving different
flavours of leptons should occur with the same probability; this symmetry
is called ‘lepton flavour universality.' Thus, the three charged elementary
particles — electrons, muons, and taus — can be treated identically,
provided their mass differences are also taken into consideration. In other
words, they would interact in the same way with other particles, as long as
differences in their masses are taken into account. Consequently, the
different lepton types would be created equally in particle transformations
or decays. This concept of ‘flavour universality' is deeply ingrained in the
symmetry structure of the Standard Model. Previous measurements have
shown that a wide range of particle decays are consistent with this
principle.

     However, the new results of the measurements made by the LHCb
Collaboration report a violation of this principle of flavour universality.
These measurements compare two types of decays. The first decay involves
the electron, and the second, the muon which is a lepton 200 times heavier
than electron. The decays involving lepton flavour universality are usually
measured by the ratio between decay probabilities. According to the
Standard Model, this ratio should be very close to one. But the new results
indicate hints of a deviation from one. Thus, in the measurements recently
reported, B mesons seemed to decay into electrons more often than to
muons, which would violate the principle of lepton universality.57 These
results were announced on 23rd March 2021 by scientists working at the
LHCb experiment; they have in fact observed the violation of lepton
universality. The deviation observed by them is consistent with a pattern of
anomalies measured in similar processes by LHCb and other experiments
world wide. The new results determine the ratio between the decay
probabilities with greater precision than previous measurements and use all
the data collected so far by the LHCb detector. The confirmation of these
results could indicate the existence of new particles and/or interactions;
and it could have profound implications for the validity of the Standard
Model, and for our understanding of the quantum world.

     Scientists associated with LHCb experiments are very much excited
about the new discoveries. They point out that the new results may indicate
a new physics beyond the Standard Model. Paula Alvarez Cartelle of the
LHCb Collaboration team observes: “These new results offer tantalizing
hints of the presence of a new fundamental particle or force that interacts
differently with these different types of particles.”58 Similarly, Chris
Parkes, spokesperson of the LHCb team says: “If a violation of lepton
flavour universality were to be confirmed, it would require a new physical
process, such as the existence of new fundamental particles or
interactions.”59 Likewise, Konstantinos Petridis also a member of the LHCb
Collaboration, suggests: “The discovery of a new fundamental force or
particle, as hinted at by the evidence of differences in these measurements
could provide the breakthrough required to start to answer these
fundamental questions.”60 Eluned Smith who coordinated the analysis of
LHCb results remarks: “There are cracks in the theory of the symmetry
between electrons and muons! If we are able to confirm the measurements
with further data, this would strongly hint at a new physics beyond the
standard model.”61

     Similar anomalous behaviour of muons is reported by Muon g-2
experiment results announced on April 7th 2021 by Fermilab. Muons occur
naturally when cosmic rays strike Earth's atmosphere; and particle
accelerators also can produce them in large numbers. Like electron, a muon
acts as a spinning magnet, as if it has a tiny internal magnet. In a strong
magnetic field, the direction of the muon's magnet precesses or wobbles,
much like the axis of a spinning top.62 The strength of the internal magnet
determines the rate at which the muon wobbles in an external magnetic
field; and it is described by a number that physicists call the ‘g-factor.'63
This parameter indicates how strong the internal magnet is and the rate of
its gyration. The accepted theoretical value of g for a charged lepton
(electron, muon, or tau) is slightly larger than 2. The difference from 2 (the
‘anomalous' part) depends on the lepton, and can be computed quite
precisely based on the Standard Model of particle physics. This difference
from 2 is produced by higher-order contributions from quantum fields.
Measurements of the electron about the difference from 2 are in excellent
agreement with this computation.

     However, that is not the case with regard to muons. As muons
circulate in Muon g-2 magnet, they also interact with the quantum ‘foam'
of subatomic particles popping in and out of existence. Interactions with
these short-lived particles affect the value of the g-factor, influencing the
muons' precession to speed up or slow down very slightly. But if the
quantum foam contains additional forces or particles which are not
accounted for by the Standard Model, that would tweak the muon g-factor
further. In measuring g-2 with high precision and comparing its value with
theoretical prediction, physicists can discover whether the experiment
agrees with theory. Any deviation would point to as yet undiscovered
particles/ forces in nature. The results of Fermilab experiments have in fact
reported such a deviation: there is a tiny difference between how muons
should behave according to the Standard Model, and how they actually
behave inside the giant Fermilab accelerator. In other words, they behave in
the accelerator slightly differently from the way their behaviour is
predicted by the Standard Model.

     The predecessor experiment at Brookhaven National Laboratory,
which concluded in 2001, had already hinted that the muon's behaviour
disagreed with the predictions of the Standard Model. The new
measurement from the Muon g-2 experiment at Fermilab strongly agrees
with the value observed at Brookhaven. Together, the two results provide
strong evidence for the fact that the measurements of muons' g-factor
diverge from the Standard Model's prediction. Renee Fatemi, a physicist at
the University of Kentucky and the simulations manager for the Muon g-2
experiment says:
       This quantity we measure reflects the interactions of the muon
       with everything else in the universe. But when the theorists
       calculate the same quantity, using all of the known forces and
       particles in the Standard Model, we don't get the same answer.
       This is strong evidence that the muon is sensitive to something
       that is not in our best theory.64

     Allena Opper, a program director in National Science Foundation's
Division of Physics concurs: “The Standard Model is very, very good at
predicting our observations of the subatomic world. This [Fermilab] result
is so exciting because it deviates so clearly from the Standard Model
prediction of the muon's g-factor; there has to be some new particle or
interaction that affects muons.”65

     Potentially, the new results are ground-breaking indications of the
existence of processes that cannot be described within the conceptual
framework of the Standard Model of particle physics. These new outcomes
from experiments at LHCb and Fermilab strengthen the case for missing
fundamental particles and/or interactions which are not accounted for
within the structure of the Standard Model. It is now up to the scientists at
the LHCb and Fermilab to further verify their results by collating and
analyzing more data. If these data are strengthened by further
measurements, it would suggest cracks in the framework of the Standard
Model. This in turn would lead to the invention of a ‘fifth' force of nature,
such as a new fundamental interaction between quarks and leptons; and
further, it would take us to a new physics beyond the present Standard
Model. Indeed, physicists believe that muons could be interacting with as
yet undiscovered particles or forces, and thus they act as windows to the
subatomic world.66

4.4.2. The Grand Unified Theory (GUT)

     The new results from LHCb at CERN about the violations of lepton
flavour universality, and the measurements of muon g-2 factor by Fermilab,
we saw, have inspired particle physicists to look beyond the Standard
Model. There is yet another reason to search for a better Model: the
incompleteness of the Standard Model itself. The current Model has not
achieved complete unification of all the four interactions; it has unified
only electromagnetism and weak nuclear force. The unfinished task is to
bring strong nuclear and gravitational forces into the fold, and achieve a
final unification. Such was the dream of Einstein who took the initiatives
towards the formulation of a unified theory in the 1920s and 1930s. Though
his efforts to construct a final theory were not successful, he inspired many
physicists by the suggestion that the different interactions of nature might
be manifestations of a single unified field. This possibility is the basis of a
unified field theory which has long been the dream of particle physicists. In
particular, it is suggested that the four fundamental forces of nature might
really be the expressions of one universal force at the beginning of the
universe. By the last quarter of the 20th century, particle physicists have
partially realized this dream of unifying different interactions. There are
now theories which attempt to unify electromagnetic, weak and strong
forces into one force. These are the unified field theories which are the
results of many years of determined efforts by reputed particle physicists;
while they may argue over the details of a unified theory, the principle of
unification is firmly established.

     The first step towards a unified field theory is the electroweak theory
in which two distinct interactions -- electromagnetic and weak -- are found
to be manifestations of underlying field symmetries. This theory serves as
the inspiration for subsequent attempts at further unifications. The next
step is the integration of electroweak model and quantum chromodynamics
into a Grand unified Theory (GUT). Even without including gravity, such a
unification of the three interactions into a magnificent theory is often
referred to as the Grand Unified Theory. Hawking comments on the
impropriety of such a designation:

       This title is rather an exaggeration: the resultant theories are
       not all that grand, nor are they fully unified, as they do not
       include gravity. Nor are they really complete theories, because
       they contain a number of parameters whose values cannot be
       predicted from the theory but have to be chosen to fit in with
       experiment. Nevertheless, they may be a step toward a
       complete, fully unified theory.67

But the title ‘Theory of Everything' or TOE is reserved for the final theory
which would include gravity as well.

     With the introduction of the concepts of gauge principle and
symmetry breaking, the programme of unification took on a new direction.
These concepts were successfully employed in the integration of
electroweak theory. Referring to the unification of electroweak and strong
interactions, Pagels says: “The problem of unifying these interactions is
thus the problem of finding a single (rather than a multiple) symmetry that
upon spontaneous symmetry breaking results in the smaller subsymmetries
that correspond to the strong and electroweak interactions.”68 Viewed in
this way, electromagnetic, weak and strong interactions owe their parentage
to a master GUT symmetry which is spontaneously broken. In other words,
in inventing the GUT, particle physicists attempt to construct a single
gauge symmetry which incorporates both electroweak theory and quantum
chromodynamics, and which spontaneously breaks at appropriate times
during the evolution of the universe. The unification of electromagnetic
and weak forces into one electroweak model is thus part of much bigger
schemes, the GUTs which claim to include the strong force as well. Only
the electroweak part of these theories has been tested; it predicts the
masses of the W± and Zo particles (about 100 times the mass of the proton),
and these have been measured at CERN. Although there is no experimental
support for grand unified theories, several projects have been proposed,
that unify the three interactions into a common framework leaving out
gravity. One such GUT was proposed by two Harvard physicists, Howard
Georgi and Sheldon Glashow in 1977; it is based on a single gauge field.
The crucial idea of their theory is to treat quarks and leptons on an equal
footing before the single symmetry is spontaneously broken. The gauge
symmetry they postulated requires a set of 24 exchange particles which
interact with quarks and leptons in a symmetrical way. But no particle
accelerator on Earth can produce enough energy to confirm the predictions
of such a Grand Unified Theory.
     One way to comprehend the unification of the three interactions is to
observe the evolution of the universe. According to Grand Unified
Theories, there was supposedly a GUT era in the very early universe in
which electroweak and strong interactions were perfectly symmetrical, and
not yet distinct. GUT models predict that at very high energies (at 1026 K),
there was no distinction between the weak, electromagnetic and strong
interactions; they were symmetrical and would be unified into a single
electronuclear interaction. This unified interaction was characterized by
one larger gauge symmetry, and had several force-carrying particles. But as
the universe expanded and the temperature dropped, the symmetry among
these interactions was spontaneously broken. With the breaking of
symmetry, various interactions became manifest; first, the super-heavy
gluons were distinguished from weak vector bosons which were then
differentiated from massless photons. Unifying gravity with the
electronuclear interaction would result in the most comprehensive theory -
the Theory of Everything (TOE). Thus, GUTs are often considered
intermediate steps towards a TOE. They are indeed half-way houses.

      Incidentally, particle physicists have noticed a curious display of small
distance scales in connection with the GUT scale in the early stages of the
universe. Apparently, there is a hierarchy of distance scales which are
milestones to ever shorter distances en route to the origin of the universe.
The relatively low energies of today's particle accelerators enable
physicists to explore down to the distance scale of the Standard Model --
10-16 cm (the electroweak scale). In this domain, electromagnetic and weak
interactions are symmetrical and unified. Physicists have noted that as the
distance scale is further decreased from the electroweak scale of 10-16 cm to
the GUT scale of 10-29 cm, no important event happens; and no new
particles appear. Glashow has appropriately dubbed this vast microscopic
region ‘the desert' because it is empty of any significant quantum event. At
the GUT scale of 10-29 cm, the GUT interactions (electroweak and strong
interactions) are perfectly symmetrical and unified. Finally, at the
incredible Planck distance scale of 10-33 cm, the effects of quantum gravity
(which have not been included in the GUTs) are manifest. Because the
Planck scale is about one ten-thousandth the length of even the incredibly
short GUT scale, most physicists prefer to ignore the effects of quantum
gravity in their speculations about GUTs. At the higher energies of the early
universe, physicists have calculated a hierarchy of extremely short
distances as follows:

The         = 10 -
electroweak 16 cm
scale
The GUT     = 10 -
scale       29
               cm
The Planck = 10 -
scale the foregoing
Between
            33
               cm three distance scales, physicists have noted large
pure numbers 10-13 (between 10-16 cm and 10-29 cm) and 10-17 (between 10-16
cm and 10-33 cm). Many of them are especially uneasy about the GUT
extrapolation of distance scales from the electroweak scale of 10-16 cm to
the GUT scale of 10-29 cm. This extrapolation is 13 powers of ten; it is
approximately similar to the thickness of one of our fingers compared to
the distance between the Earth and the Sun. If the GUT idea is correct, then
nature has a ‘micro-desert' covering an immense subatomic region.
Physicists have observed that from the macroscopic scale of super-clusters
of galaxies to the microscopic electroweak scale of 10-16 cm, nature reveals
new physical structures as the distance scale changes. Philip Morrison in
his book Powers of Ten illustrates the richness and variety of nature's
creations every time the distance scale changes by a factor of ten. Is there
some reason for this richness to suddenly cease as we probe beyond
distances corresponding to the electroweak scale of 10-16 cm, and then only
to become significant again at the GUT scale of 10-29 cm —13 powers of
ten smaller? No one knows the answer to this question. The only way to
find the answer is to continue conducting accelerator experiments at still
higher energies.

     Yet, although Grand Unified Theories are exciting, they have no direct
experimental support unlike their predecessor, the electroweak theory.
GUTs are examples of new ideas that are consistent with general principles
of physics, but as yet have no direct supporting evidence. Nevertheless,
they are at the forefront of researches in particle physics today. Physicists
are encouraged by the fact that GUTs enable them to unify the three forces
of nature at least in theory. Currently, such unification is on the mainstream
agenda of particle physics. GUTs fall short of total field unification because
they do not include gravity, the weakest of the four forces. Theoretical
physicists exploring GUTs believe that they have profound implications for
the nature and evolution of the very early universe. GUTs also predict the
existence of new properties of quantum particles, such as proton decay as
well as the existence of a whole new class of elementary particles, like
magnetic monopoles.69 We conclude with Peat that the goal of grand
unification is “nothing less than a combination of the standard model of the
elementary particles — six basic quarks and six leptons — with a universal
force.”70

4.4.3. The Theory of Everything (TOE)

     The Grand Unified Theory is in fact the stepping stone to the Theory
of Everything (TOE). Whereas the GUT theories claim to accomplish a
unification of the three non-gravitational interactions (electroweak and
strong), the TOE proposes to achieve a truly grand unification of all forces
of nature including gravity. Briggs and Peat explain the grand objective of
the Theory of Everything:

       The object of the grand unification theory [the Theory of
       Everything] is to provide a way of mathematically translating
       these four forces into each other so it can be shown how they
       all evolved from, and are expressions of, a single force. This
       would mean physicists had discovered a single unified field of
       force which accounted for everything -- the very field Einstein
       hunted for in his later years. The grand unification theory
       assumes, however, that everything, including the four forces, is
       fundamentally quantum in nature and obeys the statistical laws
       of quantum mechanics.71

The Theory of Everything is the ultimate theory, or master theory which is
supposedly a single, all-encompassing, coherent, theoretical framework of
particle physics that would fully explain and link together, all the physical
phenomena of the universe. Nobel Laureate Leon Lederman observes: “We
hope to explain the entire universe in a single, simple formula that you can
wear on your T-shirt.”72

     The Theory of Everything is the contemporary expression of the
inherent drive of the human mind to attain the ultimate unity of truth in a
final theory. Traditionally, philosophy was the model of such a
comprehensive system. According to the Greek philosopher Plato, it is
‘eros' that thrusts our mind towards ultimate simplicity and unity of truth
to be attained in philosophy. It drives constantly the philosopher as well as
the scientist/physicist to go beyond the frontiers of empirically verifiable
data and to think about a state of comprehensive unity and simplicity. For
physicists, the Theory of Everything is such an ultimate theory about
physical reality. Hawking says: “The eventual goal of science is to provide
a single theory that describes the whole universe.”73 Likewise, Barrow
suggests:

       Modern physicists believe they have stumbled upon a key
       which leads to the mathematical secret at the heart of the
       Universe - a discovery that points towards a ‘Theory of
       Everything', a single all-embracing picture of all the laws of
       Nature from which the inevitability of all things seen must
       follow with unimpeachable logic. With possession of this
       cosmic Rosetta Stone, we could read the book of Nature in all
       tenses: we could understand all that was, is, and is to come.74

Unlike other theories, like the theory of gravitation or of electromagnetism,
which deal with particular phenomena of nature, the range of TOE is much
more comprehensive and much deeper, and it relates to the whole of range
of physical reality. Barrow continues:

       Today, the real goal of the search for a Theory of Everything is
       not just to understand the structure of all the forms of matter
       that we find around us but to understand why there is any
       matter at all, to attempt to show that both the existence and the
       particular structure of the physical Universe can be understood,
       to discover whether, in Einstein's words, ‘God could have made
       the Universe in a different way; that is, whether the necessity
       of logical simplicity leaves any freedom at all'.75

     In fact, scientists have always longed for a Theory of Everything.
According to the Newtonian ideal of scientific knowledge, “from a total
description of the state of the world at one time, and a specification of all
of the laws of nature, a total description of the world at any other time can
be derived by a purely logical, deductive, inference.”76 Proposing his
version of the Theory of Everything, the great mathematician Pierre Simon
de Laplace (1749-1827) refers to an all-knowing intellect that comprehends
in one formula the motions of all physical objects in the universe:

       An intellect which at a given instant knew all the forces acting
       in nature, and the position of all things of which the world
       consists — supposing the said intellect were vast enough to
       subject these data to analysis — would embrace in the same
       formula the motions of the greatest bodies in the universe and
       those of the slightest atoms; nothing would be uncertain for it,
       and the future, like the past, would be present to its eyes.77

During the last forty years of his life, Einstein was in search of a Theory of
Everything, a unified field theory, capable of describing natures's laws and
forces in a single, all-encompassing and coherent framework. His most
cherished dream was to construct a truly Grand Unified Theory, unifying
the theory of relativity and quantum mechanics. Briggs and Peat remark on
Einstein's conception of the unified field:

       Ultimately, Einstein hoped to take relativity further by
       eliminating the ideas of other forces such as electricity and
       magnetism along with matter and replacing them all with a
       geometry of spacetime. He envisioned a ‘unified field theory'
       in which matter would appear as concentrations or humps in a
       universal field. . . . Einstein believed [sic] the universe is
       whole, that everything is ultimately equivalent to and
       transforms into everything else (depending on the relative
       motion of the observer): matter is equivalent to energy, gravity
       to acceleration, space to time. It is all one unified field.78
Hawking in his inaugural lecture at the University of Cambridge expressed
the hope that a final Theory of Everything is indeed possible; accordingly,
the title of his lecture read, “Is the End in Sight for Theoretical Physics?” It
implies that with the invention of the TOE, theoretical physics will come to
an end because, as its name suggests, it would explain everything.

     Now, the method of constructing the Theory of Everything consists in
the progressive unification of all partial theories, in particular the quantum
field theories. Hawking opines that “it would be very difficult to construct
a complete unified theory of everything in the universe all at one go. So
instead we have made progress by finding partial theories that describe a
limited range of happenings.”79 To start with, the special theory of relativity
has to be unified with quantum physics. Accordingly, particle physicists
have invented relativistic quantum field theories, such as quantum
electrodynamics, electroweak theory and quantum chromodynamics. As the
project of unification progresses, apparently different and independent field
theories are found to be linked at deeper conceptual levels. The leading
concepts in these projects are the two magnificent principles of
contemporary particle physics, namely, gauge symmetry and symmetry
breaking. Applying these principles, Sheldon, Weinberg and Salam
discovered that electromagnetic and weak nuclear forces are actually two
aspects of a single electroweak force described by a common set of
equations -- the electroweak theory. Further, Grand Unified Theories
attempt to integrate electroweak theory with quantum chromodynamics.
These theories have yet to bear fruit both theoretically and experimentally.

     In order to achieve the final stage of unification, gravitational
interaction has to be incorporated with the other three forces. But this
involves the integration of the general theory of relativity with quantum
mechanics. That is to say, a quantum theory of gravity has to be
constructed. This, we saw, requires quantization of the gravitational field,
and so a quantum description of space-time along with mass-energy at the
Planck regime. Such a quantum theory of gravity has to be integrated in the
final theory -- the Theory of Everything which is projected to be the
unification of the four fundamental interactions into a single mathematical
framework. John Gribbin suggests:
       A fully united description of the Universe and all it contains (a
       ‘theory of everything', or TOE) would have to take gravity and
       spacetime into the quantum fold. That implies that spacetime
       itself must be, on an appropriate very short-range level,
       quantised into discrete lumps, not smoothly continuous.80

Thus, the unification of the four interactions of nature into the TOE would
progress as follows: electromagnetic and weak interactions are unified into
electroweak theory which is incorporated with quantum chromodynamics
to form Grand Unified Theory; and finally, GUT would be integrated with
quantum theory of gravity to constitute the Theory of Everything. In such a
project, the TOE would be the final stage in the unification of the four
interactions of nature. (See Figure 22)
Figure 22. The progressive unification of the forces of nature
However, some theories like string theory attempt to develop a unified
framework in which all the four interactions of nature are described. Such
theories are also called ‘Theory of Everything.' Hawking concludes:
“Ultimately however, one would hope to find a complete, consistent,
unified theory that would include all these partial theories as
approximations, and that did not need to be adjusted to fit the facts by
picking the values of certain arbitrary numbers in the theory.”81
     Figure 22 shows the different relations between, and the present status
of, various quantum field theories. Quantum electrodynamics and
electroweak theory are fully developed and confirmed by experiment with
an amazing degree of accuracy. Quantum chromodynamics is theoretically
developed, but strong experimental confirmation is not yet forthcoming. A
number of quantum theories of gravity and Grand Unified Theories are
proposed, but these are neither theoretically complete nor are they
supported by experiments. The final unified theory would be the Theory of
Everything. The dotted steps show that advances are made in theory, but
that experimental support is wanting.82

     In fact, the Theory of Everything would represent the state of the
universe at its beginning. Thus, the steps towards a final unified theory are
also in a real sense steps backwards to the moment of creation of the
universe. Hence, the ultimate developments in TOE involve an
understanding of physical processes at the origin of the universe. Physicists
believe that all four interactions -electromagnetic, strong, weak and
gravitational - were unified as one universal interaction at ultra-high
energies of the primordial universe. Such high energies would never be
produced in particle accelerators on Earth. The only time that such energies
existed was at the very beginning of the universe. That was just 10-43 sec
after the universe emerged from the purported Big Bang singularity.
Physicists believe that just after the Big Bang itself, there was an era,
called the ‘Planck epoch.' During this period, there was only one ‘super-
force' in which gravity was unified with other three interactions. At the
Planck time scale of 10-43 sec, distance scale of 10-33 cm, temperatures
above 1032 K and energies in excess of 1019 GeV, the four fundamental
forces were unified and the strength of gravity would have been equal to
the strengths of the other forces of nature. This is indeed the regime of the
Theory of Everything.

     In the last analysis, the project of constructing the Theory of
Everything involves inventing a gauge field symmetry which would explain
the unity and diversity of the four interactions. Pagels observes: “The royal
road to unification was now seen as uniting fields under the aegis of a
spontaneously broken symmetry. The notion of a broken symmetry
explained how it was possible that forces which were fundamentally
unified and symmetrical could be manifested so differently in nature.”83
Hence, the unification of the four fundamental interactions has to do with
inventing a gauge symmetry/field which integrates them all, and which
manifests their diversity in symmetry breaking. Barrow suggests:

       Moreover, to complete a fully unified picture of the Universe,
       we must do something about the fact that we have many
       different gauge theories which must be unified into a single
       description by embedding the different symmetries associated
       with individual theories into a bigger over-riding pattern, or a
       grand unified theory [a Theory of Everything].84

Barrow expresses the same idea differently:

       Each of the four forces of Nature is accurately described by a
       theory that derives from the assumption of a particular
       invariance under all possible changes. The quest for unification
       proceeds by seeking to embed the separate patterns preserved
       by the several forces of Nature within a single ‘Grand Unified'
       pattern into which the sub-patterns fit uniquely and
       completely.85

Thus in inventing the TOE, particle physicists attempt to construct a single
gauge field symmetry that incorporates all the four interactions of nature;
this symmetry breaks at appropriate times and the forces separate with
their different ranges and their associated quanta with varying masses.

     Now, we get a deeper comprehension of the Theory of Everything by
reflecting on some of its logical properties. This would also highlight some
flaws of this projected great theory. A number of renowned physicists have
adverted to the logical characteristics of TOE. First and foremost, unlike all
other scientific theories, it would be literally comprehensive, and it would
explain the whole range of physical reality. Hence, all other theories and
laws of science could be logically inferred from this master theory. Pagels
says:
       Such a physical law [Theory of Everything] would explain the
       origin of the universe, its contents and its destiny. All other
       natural laws could be logically deduced from this one law. If
       such a law were discovered, it would be the final triumph of
       physics: the logical account of the foundation of existence
       would then be complete.86

Davies shares a similar view:

       All the laws of physics, all the parameters in the standard
       model, the various constants of nature, the existence of three
       dimensional space and one dimensional time, the origin of the
       universe, quantum mechanics, relativistic spacetime and their
       causal properties — all will follow inexorably and inevitably
       from the unified theory. In that case, the Universe must exist
       necessarily as it is; it could not have been otherwise. Such a
       theory of everything purportedly provides a complete
       understanding of physical existence. Nothing is left
       unexplained; nothing of a fundamental nature is arbitrary or
       the result of chance.87

      Moreover, the Theory of Everything would eliminate all arbitrary
initial conditions, such as those of the Big Bang, and account for all free
parameters of physics, like the fundamental constants of nature and
velocity of light. Boslough points out: “One would not regard a theory as
complete if it contained a number of adjustable parameters such as masses
or coupling constants which could be given any value one liked such as
proton-neutron mass difference being about twice the mass of the
electron.”88 Likewise, Pagels observes: “Yet most physicists feel that the
ultimate theory should have no input parameters, no fundamental
dimensionless constants, and that all the masses of quarks, and all coupling
strengths, should be predicted by such a master theory.”89 The values of
these quantities would not be adjustable, but would be fixed by the TOE
itself. Furthermore, a unified Theory of Everything purportedly would
predict the actual numerical values of the physical constants and relate
them to one another. Barrow refers to this property as the ultimate logical
test of TOE: “If we find the Theory of Everything, it should tell us the
values of the fundamental constants — and this would be the ultimate test
of such a theory.”90 Pagels suggests that the final goal TOE is to invent a
theory without any free parameters or constants: “Ultimately the goal is to
find a master theory with no arbitrary parameters, so that every physical
constant can be calculated.”91 He calls this property the ‘parameter
reduction' of TOE. “Such parameter reduction is another goal of the
fieldunification program.”92 Incidentally, Einstein refers to a theorem,
supposedly the Theory of Everything, in which there would be no free
parameters and no arbitrary constants of nature:

       Concerning such [dimensionless constants] I would like to
       state a theorem which at present cannot be based upon anything
       more than upon a faith in the simplicity, i.e., intelligibility of
       nature: there are no arbitrary constants of this kind; that is to
       say, nature is so constituted that it is possible logically to lay
       down such strongly determined laws that within these laws
       only rationally completely determined constants occur (not
       constants, therefore, whose numerical value could be changed
       without destroying the theory).93

     The Theory of Everything then aims at providing a unique, self-
consistent description of physical reality. In its most ambitious form, it
seeks to combine all quantum field theories and physical laws into a single,
unified mathematical scheme, hopefully captured in a simple formula.
Such a theory purportedly would provide a complete description of the
universe in terms of a closed system of logical truths, and would provide an
ultimate comprehension of the totality of physical existence. Hence, the
final theory would have the character of logical necessity. Davies says: “We
would finally know the reason for existence; it had to be like this (or not
exist at all).”94 TOE would be the only logically self-consistent theory
which supposedly tells us why everything is what it is.

    However, these tall claims of the Theory of Everything are challenged
by Gödel's incompleteness theorem. According to this theorem, it is
impossible to construct a mathematical framework as a closed system of
truths; it would necessarily be incomplete. Since theories of physics,
including the TOE, employ mathematical systems, they would also be
similarly incomplete. Hence, no such system of physics can ever hope to
achieve completion and logical necessity, but would always remain
unfinished. Truly, at the core of any constructed Theory of Everything
would be found lurking the inevitable incompleteness on account of
Gödel's theorem.

     Gödel's theorem proves that deductive mathematical systems based on
axiomatic method have certain inherent limitations. According to the great
mathematician Kurt Gödel, such a formalized, consistent system with true
statements is essentially incomplete. No consistent mathematical system
can prove all of its propositions to be true within the system itself. That is
to say, if a mathematical system is consistent in so far as it does not contain
any contradiction, then it would be incomplete in as much as there would
be some true statements that cannot be proved using the axioms and rules
of that system. Hence, in any system of mathematics, there will always be
some statements which cannot be proved to be true within that system. In
short, Gödel proved that no mathematical system can be both consistent —
meaning without contradiction — and complete

          — meaning that all of its propositions can be proved to be true
     within the system itself.

      Since we take consistency to be the hallmark of a deductive system,
we would have to sacrifice its completeness, that is, the truths of some of
its propositions within the system. It follows, then, that mathematics would
never constitute a completely closed logical system of knowledge, but
always remain incomplete. Eminent Oxford mathematician Roger Penrose
says: “No matter how comprehensive we think we have been, there will
always be some propositions which escape the net.”95 Similarly, physicist
Douglas Hofstadter remarks: “The goal of total and pure truth is, however,
as unreachable by formal method as is the speed of light by any material
object.”96 Mathematician Morris Kline caustically remarks that
mathematicians had been “worshipping a golden calf — rigorous,
universally acceptable proof, true in all possible worlds — in the belief that
it was God. They now realize it was a false god.”97

     A number of reputed physicists and thinkers have commented on the
profound implications of Gödel's theorem for systems of physics in
general, and for a Theory of Everything in particular. Renowned particle
physicist Freeman Dyson has stated:

       Gödel's theorem implies that pure mathematics is
       inexhaustible. No matter how many problems we solve, there
       will always be other problems that cannot be solved within the
       existing rules. . . Because of Gödel's theorem, physics is
       inexhaustible too. The laws of physics are a finite set of rules,
       and include the rules for doing mathematics, so that Gödel's
       theorem applies to them.98

     Further, Gödel's theorem has devastating effect on the unique Theory
of Everything. Philosopher of physics Michael Redhead is forthright when
he says that “this amazing result [of Gödel's theorem] does strike tellingly
at the possibility of a theory of everything, at a very fundamental level.”99
Likewise, physicist Menas Kafatos and Robert Nadeau suggest:

       If no mathematical system, no matter how formal, can reach
       closure, then it follows no physical theory built, as all modern
       physical theories must be, on mathematical systems, can reach
       closure. This means, in short, that even if we do construct a
       ‘Theory of Everything,' and even if that theory could somehow
       coordinate within its mathematical framework an explanation
       of the phenomena of life and/or consciousness, this theory
       could not ‘in principle' claim to be a complete, final, or
       ultimate description.100

Davies states that a final theory which is consistent and complete is
impossible: “So the search for a genuinely unique Theory of Everything
that would eliminate all contingency and demonstrate that the physical
world must necessarily be as it is, seems to be doomed to failure on
grounds of logical consistency. No rational system can be both consistent
and complete.”101 Similarly, Barrow acknowledges: “There is no formula
that can deliver all truth, all harmony, all simplicity. No Theory of
Everything can ever provide total insight. For, to see through everything
would leave us seeing nothing at all.”102

     Apart from the devastating effect of Gödel's theorem, there is another
profound problem that bedevils the Theory of Everything. Davies calls it
the ‘fire-breathing actualizer.'103 This phrase has reference to Hawking's
famous allusion to ‘breathing fire into the equations.' He says: “Even if
there is only one possible unified theory, it is just a set of rules and
equations. What is it that breathes fire into the equations and makes a
universe for them to describe? . . . Why does the universe go to all the
bother of existing? Is unified theory so compelling that it brings about its
own existence?”104 Hawking's questions entail that even if physicists
construct a Theory of Everything, it cannot instantiate itself and create a
universe. Davies aptly asks: “Who, or what, promotes the ‘merely possible,'
to the ‘actually existing?”105 In other words, how is it that the merely
possible universe represented by the TOE happens to become the real
universe? “A Theory of everything cannot ‘officiate' at its own
instantiation of bringing about the Universe into existence.”106 Willem
Drees makes a similar point when he says: “A mathematical idea of getting
a universe from nothing does not give a physical universe, but only the idea
of a physical universe — assuming that there is a difference between the
Universe and a mathematical idea about the Universe. There has to be some
input of ‘physical reality.'”107 A genuine Theory of Everything must
therefore explain itself and also how the universe came into existence. Of
course, these problems have not deterred particle physicists from pursuing
their ultimate dream of constructing a Theory of Everything.

     As we close our discourse on “The Standard Model of Particle
Physics,” we have to admit that it is a magnificent creation of human
scientific creativity. It succeeds at least in partially unifying the
fundamental particles and forces of nature. More importantly, it has
provided particle physicists keys like gauge principle and symmetry
breaking to unlock the secrets of physical reality. These help to solve the
great riddle of unity in the great diversity of natural phenomena. We
conclude the present chapter with a quote from Pagels on the Standard
Model:

      There you have it: the standard model consisting jointly of
      quantum chromodynamics for the strong interactions of the
      quarks and the electro-weak theory for the electromagnetic and
      weak interactions of the quarks and leptons. It seems consistent
      with all experiments; but more tests remains to be done. . . .
      Most particle theorists take the Standard Model as gospel
      truth; it describes how to build a universe, and any future
      model must include it.108
                                    5
  THE QUANTUM WORLD AND THE OBSERVER
       It is not possible to formulate the laws [of quantum physics] in
       a fully consistent way without reference to consciousness.

              –Eugene Wigner, Symmetries and Reflections

     The present chapter and its contents may appear unorthodox and/or
mystifying to some physicists who hold on to the Newtonian ideal of
science. For them, scientific investigations should be an impersonal affair,
and the human observer should not be allowed to intrude into the
impassionate enterprise called science, especially physics. However, great
quantum physicists, like Niels Bohr, Werner Heisenberg, Max Born, John
von Neumann, Eugene Wigner and John Wheeler, have categorically
affirmed that the observer/consciousness has a role to play in quantum
physics. As Wigner's quote above implies, no account of quantum physics
would be complete without also referring to the place of
observer/consciousness in the quantum world. In the first chapter of the
present book, we mentioned that one of the principal motifs of quantum
physics is the relation between the quantum system and the observer.
Similarly, in the second chapter we indicated that the observer appears to
have a role in the collapse of the wave function, at least according to
Copenhagen interpretation. This is in contrast to Newtonian mechanics in
which the observer is a mere spectator of cosmic drama. Classical,
Newtonian physics has seemingly exiled observer/consciousness from
scientific enterprise; however, quantum mechanics appears to have re-
instated it and brought it in through the back door.

5.1. The Observer in the Classical World

      The role of the observer/consciousness in quantum mechanics is best
illustrated by contrasting its place in Newtonian theory. Newton's physics
makes two sets of assumptions regarding the mode of existence of
physical objects, and the effect of observation and measurement on them.
John Honner writes:

       Crucial to the success of the mechanist model is the
       assumption that the physical objects are entirely independent
       of the effects of observation, so that any measurements of the
       state of the system at any point in space and time do not
       interfere with its future pathways in space and time. A second
       assumption is that these independent physical bodies are
       permanent and that they maintain the properties we observe in
       them whether we are observing or not.1

We take up the second assumption first. Classical mechanics postulates
that physical objects exist permanently over time, independently of being
observed or interacted with. At any particular time, they have mass,
definite dimensions, position in space (both location and orientation) and
motion (both velocity and rotation) in time. In other words, material
particles and their aggregates have definite mass, places, times and
velocities independent of our observing them. These are all in fact part of
our common sense perception and understanding of physical objects in the
world around us.

     The first assumption mentioned above affirms that according to
Newtonian mechanics, physical objects exist independently of our
observation and measurement. Obviously, we come to know physical
systems by making measurements or observations. “A measurement is a
straightforward physical process of interaction between a measuring
instrument and a measured system, the outcome of which is directly
related to the feature of the system under investigation in a known way.”2
According to classical physics, observations either produce no significant
disturbance on measured systems, or else such disturbances are precisely
calculable. Physical systems exist and evolve independently of the
presence of observers as observers. “The old physics assumes that there is
an external world which exists apart from us. It further assumes that we
can observe, measure, and speculate about the external world without
changing it.”3 The existence and nature of physical objects and processes
in general are not directly dependent upon their being observed. Observers
as intelligent beings play no essential role in the measuring process.
Properties of physical objects, such as mass, position, duration and
velocity, measured by an observer exist independently of the observer. In
other words, physical systems - objects and their motions - are in no way
affected or disturbed by an observation. An object would be what it is
whether it is observed or not.

    Great physicists have acknowledged the independence of the
observed physical system from the observer in classical mechanics.
Heisenberg says:

       In fact, our ordinary description of nature, and the idea of
       exact laws, rests on the assumption that it is possible to
       observe the phenomena without appreciably influencing them.
       To coordinate a definite cause to a definite effect has sense
       only when both can be observed without introducing a foreign
       element disturbing their interaction.4

Max Born testifies:

       The generation to which Einstein, Bohr, and I belong was
       taught that there exists an objective physical world, which
       unfolds itself according to immutable laws independent of us;
       we are watching this process as the audience watches a play in
       a theater. Einstein still believes that this should be the relation
       between the scientific observer and his subject.5

Paul Davies and John Gribbin attest:

       In the pre-quantum era of physics, everyone assumed that the
       world ‘out there' existed in a well-defined state quite
       irrespective of whether, or how, it was observed. Admittedly
       the act of observation would intrude into that reality, for we
       cannot observe anything without interacting with it physically
       to some extent; yet it was always supposed that the interaction
       was purely incidental and could either be made arbitrarily
       small (at least in principle) or else be performed in a
       controlled way and so be taken precisely into account.6

Zukav shares a similar view: “The concept of scientific objectivity rests
upon the assumption of an external world which is ‘out there' as opposed
to an ‘I' which is ‘in here.' . . . According to this view, Nature, in all
diversity, is ‘out there.' The task of the scientist is to observe the ‘out
there' as objectively as possible.”7

      Such a belief in the separation of the observed physical object and the
observer resulted in a world view in which man and nature parted ways to
evolve and subsist by themselves. The world of nature was thought to be
an impersonal, mathematically ordered machine. Reputed historian and
philosopher John Randall summarizes the Newtonian mechanistic
conception of the world: “The world is a vast perpetual motion machine,
and every event in it can be deduced mathematically from the fundamental
principles of its mechanical action; the discovery of these mathematical
relations is the goal of science.”8 Zukav observes that such a mechanistic
view of the world correlates with the search after complete objectivity in
scientific knowledge: “The Great Machine is impersonal. In fact, it was
precisely this impersonality that inspired scientists to strive for ‘absolute
objectivity.'”9 The end result of such impersonal, mechanistic world view
was that it had no place for mind/consciousness. Errol Harris observes:

       But the Newtonian instauration provided no mechanics of the
       mind, and the celestial mechanics made no room for
       consciousness. The scientific observer viewed the world, as it
       were, from the outside, and within that world no provision was
       made for any consciousness. The observer, therefore,
       remained outside the purview of investigation and was
       presumed to make no difference to its results.10

Likewise, Davies says: “[T]he clockwork mechanism [the physical world]
carried on turning, completely oblivious of whether, or by whom, it was
being observed.”11 Philosopher of science Edwin Burtt comments on man's
experience in such an impersonal, mechanistic universe: “Man begins to
appear for the first time in the history of thought as an irrelevant spectator
and insignificant effect of the great mathematical system which is the
substance of reality.”12 The natural world was portrayed as a vast, self-
contained, mathematical machine, consisting of motions of material
particles and their aggregates in space and time, and man with his
purposes, feelings and aspirations was demoted as a mere onlooker of
cosmic phenomena.

     Thus, in the Newtonian, mechanistic world view, the physical world
was conceived as a vast machine, in which there was no room for
observer/human mind. Although the importance of observation was
stressed by scientists, the observer as observer had no role to play in
scientific enterprise. The observer was set apart from the scene that was
being surveyed, a scene viewed from the outside, as it were, through a
telescope or a microscope, or other instruments of observation. We
conclude with the words of physicist Alastair Rae:

       Ever since the beginning of modern science four or five
       hundred years ago, scientific thought seems to have moved
       man and consciousness further from the centre of things.
       More and more of the universe has become explicable in
       mechanical, objective terms, and even human beings are
       becoming understood scientifically by biologists and
       behavioural scientists.13

5.2. The Observer in the Quantum World

     In fact, until the advent of quantum physics, it was irrelevant to
discuss the role of observer/consciousness in physical sciences. But as the
renowned philosopher of science Karl Popper says, in the quantum
scenario “we have to regard ‘the observer' or ‘the subject' as particularly
important, because atomic theory takes its peculiar character largely from
the interference of the subject or the observer (and his ‘measuring
agencies') with the physical object under investigation.”14 In general, this
is known as the ‘measurement problem.'
5.2.1. The Observer and Measurement of Quantum Objects

     The measurement/observation of physical systems and the relation of
the observer to these systems were not problems for classical physics -
both Newtonian mechanics and the theory of relativity. But in quantum
theory, these have turned out to be disturbing questions to physicists.
Davies and Gribbin testify:

       Probably the most unsettling aspect of these studies [quantum
       physics] is the way that the observer seems to play a central
       role in fixing the nature of reality at the quantum level. This
       has long worried both physicists and philosophers. . . . But
       quantum physics presents a picture of reality in which
       observer and observed are inextricably interwoven in an
       intimate way. The effect of observation is absolutely
       fundamental to the reality that is revealed, and cannot be
       either reduced or simply compensated for.15

The role of the observer in the quantum world has to do first and foremost
with the measurement/observation of quantum objects. As we have seen,
according to the Copenhagen interpretation, when the measurement of a
quantum object is made by an observer, its wave function collapses, and
one of its possibilities turns into actuality.16 Ian Barbour clarifies the
meaning of observing in this context: “Observing consists in extracting
from the existing probability distribution one of the many possibilities it
contains. The influence of the observer, in this [Copenhagen] view, does
not consist in disturbing a previously precise though unknown value, but
in forcing one of the many existing potentialities to be actualized.”17

     Eminent physicists have supported the Copenhagen view that the
observer is deeply involved in the process of observing quantum objects.
Bohr and Heisenberg, the great founders of the Copenhagen school, have
categorically affirmed this position. Bohr says: “Now, the quantum
postulate implies that any observation of atomic phenomena will involve
an interaction with the agency of observation . . . . Accordingly, an
independent reality in the ordinary sense can neither be ascribed to the
phenomena nor to the agencies of observation.”18 Heisenberg remarks
about the intimate link between the observed system and the observer:
“This indeterminateness of the picture of the [quantum] process is a direct
result of the indeterminateness of the concept ‘observation'— it is not
possible to decide, other than arbitrarily, what objects are to be considered
as part of the observed system and what as part of the observer's
apparatus.”19 Davies and Gribbin opine: “The oddity of ‘the collapse of the
wave function' is that it seems to depend upon the activities of the
observer. If nobody looks, then the wave [function] never collapses. So the
behaviour of a particle such as an electron appears to vary according to
whether it is being watched or not.”20

     Obviously, the key concept in the ‘measurement problem' is the wave
function, the fundamental postulate in quantum mechanics; and so we can
comprehend the role of the observer in the process of measurement only
by understanding the implications of this notion. This can best be achieved
by contrasting wave function with the comparable concept in classical
mechanics, namely, the initial conditions.21 The wave function supposedly
‘represents' the ‘state' of a quantum particle, which is not an actual state,
but a superposition of all its possibilities. In contrast, the initial conditions
in classical mechanics comprise the actual state of an object. Take for
example, the case of a boy throwing a stone at a distant target. The state of
this object -- the initial conditions of the stone -- consists of quantities,
such as its stuff, mass, shape, weight, position and velocity. Another
example is tossing a coin. The initial conditions of the coin includes
quantities, like its mass, weight, shape, precise position, orientation in
space and motion at some instant of time.

     The important point to note here is that these initial conditions of
stone and coin are actual quantities, not mere possibilities as in the case of
the wave function of a quantum object. An observer is not needed in order
to transform their possibilities into actualities simply because all the
possibilities (quantities) of these physical objects are actually present. In
the case of the stone, its position and velocity are actual quantities which
can be precisely stated; and if it is thrown, the time it takes for hitting the
target can in principle be predicted with precision. Similarly, in the case of
the coin, it would be possible to know precisely its initial conditions, and
the outcome of tosses can be predicted at least in principle with certainty.
Hence, in classical physics, given sufficient information about the initial
conditions of a physical object and the related laws of physics, one can in
principle predict its behaviour with certainty. Moreover, in both cases -
throwing a stone and tossing a coin -- an observer merely registers the
trajectory of stone and the movement of tossed coin; his/her observation in
no way affects the motion of ball or of coin, but just records the hitting of
stone at the target and outcome of the tosses. A camera will equally do the
job of observing these objects - the thrown stone and the tossed coin.
However, certain knowledge of the movements of physical objects, like
thrown stone and tossed coin, is rarely achieved in classical physics; in
most cases, only probability is attained. The reason is that most often the
knowledge of initial conditions is incomplete or errors creep in. In
classical physics then the use of probabilities is due to practical
limitations of our knowledge of initial conditions and of other
determinants. That is the reason why predictions are only probable.

      However, the quantum scenario is in complete contrast with the
classical setting. Here the state of a quantum object is described by a wave
function. But unlike the initial conditions of a physical object in classical
mechanics, the wave function does not represent anything actual, but is a
superposition of all the possibilities of a quantum object. For instance, the
reality of an electron as particle or as wave, and its properties, such as
position and velocity, are not actual quantities, but evolve as an ensemble
of possibilities. The electron's wave function describes the superposition
of these possibilities; and Schrödinger's wave equation predicts the
probability of some of these possibilities becoming actual. These
equations allow us to calculate, for instance, the relative probabilities of
finding an electron at different locations on an image screen in double-slit
experiment. Since the wave function describes an ensemble of
possibilities, one can calculate only probability, not the actual outcome of
any particular possibility. Here probability is an inherent feature of an
evolving quantum object, not a result of incomplete knowledge as in
classical physics. Physicist Stephen Barr explains:
       There [in quantum theory] one cannot dispense with
       probabilistic concepts; they are woven into the very fabric of
       the theory. Even if one had all the information about a
       physical system which it were possible to have at one time, . .
       . one would still not be able to predict everything about the
       future behavior of that system with certainty. . . .

       There is, then, a profound difference in the way probability
       enters in the two frameworks [Newtonian mechanics and
       quantum physics]. In the classical framework, the use of
       probability is not in principle necessary, whereas in the
       quantum framework it is. In quantum theory the probability
       amplitudes are at the very heart of the mathematical
       description of physical reality.22

Similarly, Davies says: “Quantum mechanics is therefore a statistical
theory. But unlike other statistical theories (e.g. the behavior of stock
markets, roulette wheels) its probabilistic nature is not merely a matter of
ignorance of details; it is inherent.”23 Hence in classical physics,
probability does not play the fundamental role that it does in quantum
mechanics. The latter is intrinsically probabilistic in a way in which
classical physics is not.

     But supposing the wave function were to describe some actual states
of quantum objects as in classical physics, the observer would not have a
role to play in quantum theory.24 It is precisely the characterization of
wave function as an ensemble of possibilities, and the insertion of
probabilistic concepts into the very fabric of quantum theory that open
door to the entry of observer in the process of measurement/observation.
Thus, as long as the wave function of a quantum system like an electron is
undisturbed by external influences, that is, before it is measured/observed,
it evolves as a superposition of possibilities. The Schrödinger equation
predicts the probabilities of these possibilities becoming actual. This
means that if the probabilities of a quantum system are specified at one
time, their values at later times are in principle computable. But, when the
system is measured and observed, one of the possibilities represented by
wave function, and whose probable occurrence, among others, has been
predicted by Schrödinger equation, becomes actual, and the rest continue
to evolve as possibilities. This is in fact the collapse of the wave function.
Barr writes: “The point at which the transition is made between the
hypothetical and the actual is the point at which the observer makes the
measurement/observation that one hypothetical possibility did actualize,
and the others did not, that the measurement gave one result, and not the
others.”25

     Thus, the wave function of a quantum object, such as a photon or an
electron collapses, and a transition from possibilities to actuality takes
place when a measurement is made by the observer. Nobel Laureate
Eugene Wigner was one of the first physicists to recognize the influence
of observer/consciousness in quantum measurement. He says:

       The being with a consciousness must have a different role in
       quantum mechanics than the inanimate measuring device. . . .
       In other words, the impression which one gains at an
       interaction, called also the result of an observation, modifies
       the wave function of the system. The modified wave function
       is, furthermore, in general unpredictable before the
       impression gained at the interaction has entered our
       consciousness: it is the entering of an impression into our
       consciousness which alters the wave function . . . . It is at this
       point that the consciousness enters the theory unavoidably and
       unalterably.26

     Renowned mathematician and physicist John von Neumann critically
examined the entire chain of events involved in an experiment which
consists of the quantum system being measured, the measuring device,
such as a photographic plate on which the result is recorded, and the
human observer. He realized that all of these elements with the exception
of the observer are composed of the same subatomic particles. Only the
human observer by virtue of his/her consciousness is unique. Von
Neumann was forced to conclude that the ultimate outcome of a quantum
experiment is determined by human consciousness. Nick Herbert
comments on von Neumann's predicament:

       In desperation von Neumann seized on its [the chain of
       elements in an experiment] only peculiar link: the process by
       which a physical signal in the brain becomes an experience in
       the human mind. This is the only process in the whole von
       Neumann chain which is not mere molecules in motion. Von
       Neumann reluctantly came to the conclusion that the human
       consciousness is the site of the wave function collapse.27

As physicist Max Jammer comments, it was “von Neumann's far-reaching
contention that it is impossible to formulate a complete and consistent
theory of quantum mechanical measurement without reference to human
consciousness.”28 Fritjof Capra shares a similar view: “In atomic physics
the observed phenomena can be understood only as correlations between
various processes of observation and measurement, and the end of this
chain of processes lies always in the consciousness of the human
observer.”29

     Now, the question is, can a physical system like a camera take the
place of an observer in the measurement of a quantum system? Physicist
Walter Heitler asks, “if it is sufficient to carry out a measurement by a
self-registering apparatus [like a camera] or whether the presence of an
observer is required.” He answers that such an apparatus is insufficient,
and that “the observer appears, as a necessary part of the whole structure,
and in his full capacity as a conscious being.”30 This means that a
recording device like a camera cannot function as an observer in the
measurement of a quantum system. Physicists, like Eugene Wigner, John
von Neumann, Frits London, Edmond Bauer and Rudolf Peierls, have
strongly supported this view.

     Let us examine whether a camera or any other recording device can
replace an observer. The camera and film are themselves physical systems
made up of subatomic particles similar to the particle they are supposed to
record. Consequently, the behaviour of camera and film can also be
described using equations of quantum theory, just as the evolution of the
particle in question is described. In principle, it is possible to write down a
very complex wave function that describes the whole complex system
consisting of the evolution of particle, camera and film. That wave
function will evolve in accordance with Schrödinger equation and would
yield only probabilities. The camera capturing on film the motion of
particle would be described in terms of these probabilities. Hence, the
camera ‘taking' snapshot would not produce a definite outcome. In other
words, the wave function that describes what happens to the whole system
of particle, camera and film, contains only probabilities of the evolution of
the complex system. But it would not tell us which of those probabilities is
actually realized.31

     The problem here is that by expanding the mathematical description
to include camera and film, these become part of the continuous evolution
of the wave function which describes their probabilities. The whole system
is then trapped in the realm of probabilities; there is nothing outside the
new, larger wave function causing it to collapse. For this to happen, there
has to be an observer outside the whole system. John von Neumann
envisaged an apparently unending chain of measuring devices, each
observing the preceding member of the series, but none ever bringing
about the collapse of the wave function. The chain can then only come to
an end with a conscious observer. Only with the measurement by an
observer will the entire pyramid of quantum ‘limbo' states collapse into a
concrete actuality. Barr says: “In short, the observer cannot be considered
part of the system that is being physically described and remain the
observer of it. . . . You [the observer] cannot be described completely by
the wave function and also collapse it.”32

     This means that in the mathematical description of the quantum
system to be measured, it is not possible to include the observer. For if one
attempted to describe the observer in the mathematics of quantum theory,
then the observer too would become a part of the quantum world of
probability. The observer would step out of the world of facts, so to speak,
and enter into the realm of possibilities and probabilities. However, the
role that the observer plays in quantum physics is precisely to allow an
escape from the realm of possibilities. Hence, if the observer were to
become part of it, the observer would not be able to play this role. In other
words, the original observer would have abdicated the function of observer
by becoming part of the quantum system being observed. The task of
observer would have to be taken up by someone else — someone outside
the mathematical description. The upshot of these considerations is that
the observer as observer is not describable by the mathematics of quantum
theory.33 We affirm with Barr: “The mathematical description of the
physical world given to us by quantum theory presupposes the existence of
observers who lie outside those mathematical descriptions.”34 Hence, we
may safely conclude that the observer or consciousness plays a
fundamental role in quantum mechanics. This position is accepted by the
significant number of physicists already referred, but they do not all have
the same idea about the role of consciousness in the measurement process.
However, that consciousness or mind is a fundamental reality which is not
reducible to physical description is clearly admitted by Eugene Wigner,
Fritz London, Edmond Bauer and Rudolf Peierls. Quantum physicists
Henry Stapp and Euan Squires have most forcefully argued in support of
this point of view.35

     Nevertheless, the role of mind in quantum mechanics is viewed with
great suspicion by a number of physicists. Eminent physicists, like
Einstein, and philosophers of science, like Karl Popper and Ernest Nagel,
have voiced strong objections against the intrusion of the
observer/consciousness into physics.36 We do not go in for a detailed
discussion of their positions, but just quote only Popper who is a very
acerbic critic of assigning a role to consciousness in quantum physics. He
states:

       In this introduction, [to his book Quantum Theory and Schism
       in Physics] I attempt to exorcize the ghost called
       ‘consciousness' or ‘the observer' from quantum mechanics,
       and to show that quantum mechanics is as ‘objective' a theory
       as, say, classical statistical mechanics. In the body of this
       volume, I shall attempt to substantiate my argument in
       somewhat greater detail, and to state my own understanding of
       these issues that have plagued quantum theory over the past
       fifty years, and my own alternative approach.

       My thesis in this introduction is that the observer, or better,
       the experimentalist, plays in quantum theory exactly the same
       role as in classical physics. His task is to test the theory.37

But Euan Squires counters:

       It is probably fair to say that most members of the physics
       community would reject ideas [about role of the observer].
       [However], their reasons would be based more on prejudice
       than on sound argument, and the proportion of those who
       reject would be much smaller if we considered only those who
       had actually thought carefully about the problems of quantum
       theory.38

As a matter of fact, the Many Worlds hypothesis is the only theory which
can serve as an alternative to the involvement of the observer/ mind in the
measurement process. But that is a huge ransom for rejecting the observer.
Barr says: “The price to be paid for eliminating the observer and the
observer's mind from the picture in this way, however, is the postulating of
an infinite number of branches of reality, with an infinite number of
versions of every person, that are completely unobservable to us [Many
Worlds hypothesis].”39

     We conclude with the statements of some physicists affirming the
role of the observer in the quantum world. Niels Bohr, the great founder of
the Copenhagen school, says: “Indeed, the finite interaction between
object and measuring agencies . . . entails the necessity of a final
renunciation of the classical ideal . . . and a radical revision of our attitude
towards the problem of physical reality.”40 Pagels concurs: “The ancient
idea that the world actually exists in a definite state has come to an end.
The quantum theory reveals a new message — reality is in part created by
the observer.”41 John von Neumann, we saw, has argued that the
measurement problem can only be resolved by appeal to human
consciousness. Referring to von Neumann's view, Robert J. Russell says:
“Since even the macroscopic apparatus must in principle be understood
quantum mechanically, only the conscious observer can actualize quantum
properties and, in this (strong) sense according to von Neumann,
consciousness creates the objective world.”42

5.2.2. The Observer and the Properties of Quantum Objects

      Here again we start our discourse on the relations between the
observer and the properties of quantum objects by comparing them with
corresponding relations in Newton's mechanics and Einstein's theory of
relativity. In classical physics and also in our ordinary experience, we have
said, measured/observed objects exist by themselves; and they have
properties independently of the measuring instruments or the observer. In
classical mechanics, the observer does not figure in any significant sense
of the term in the measurement process; rather the observer is effectively
excluded. The basic quantities of Newtonian physics, namely, space, time,
matter and motion, are thought to be absolute, existing independently of
the knowledge of the observer. “For the scientist, to say that a datum is
‘absolute' is to say that it is not linked to this or that observer, . . .”43
Further, the properties of physical objects also exist independently of the
observer. The properties, such as length, mass and duration, are not
influenced by the measurement of, or by the state of motion of, the
observer. These are absolute in so far as they remain constant always and
everywhere, whether they are observed or not, or whether the observer is
moving or not. In classical physics, these properties are thought to be
inherent attributes of physical systems being observed.

      Oddly enough, it was Einstein's theory of relativity which for the first
time in the history of physics introduced observer in a scientific theory in
an essential way. Harris suggests: “Quantum theory and Relativity finally
undermined the classical dichotomy, because they involved the observer
inextricably with what was observed.”44 With the advent of the theory of
relativity, there is no absolute standard of measurement, and every frame
of reference became relative to every other. Harris says: “When it had
been established that there was no absolute frame of reference, that every
frame was in motion relative to every other, the velocity of the observer
affected every observation and every measurement.”45 This means that
according to the theory of relativity, the properties of physical objects are
not intrinsic, but relative to the observer. Blanché tells us:

       The theory of relativity teaches us that these [length, duration
       and mass] are not properties inherent in things and physical
       phenomena, but only relations between them and a given
       observer. To ask what is the distance between A and B is a
       question as meaningless as to ask what is the position of a
       point -- unless a reference system is specified, or at least,
       unless such a referential is implicitly and indubitably
       understood.46

      Thus, the theory of relativity teaches that there is no absolute
standard of mass, length and duration independent of the observer; it all
depends on the state of motion of the observer. The great physicist Arthur
Eddington refers to the crucial role of human observer in the phenomenon
of length contraction in the special theory of relativity: “When a rod is
started from rest into uniform motion, nothing whatever happens to the
rod. We say that it contracts; but length is not a property of the rod; it is a
relation between the rod and the observer. Until the observer is specified,
the length of the rod is quite indeterminate.”47 Ian Barbour speaks in a
similar vein: “In relativity, all the basic properties of objects, such as
length, time, and mass, are relative to the observer.”48 Hence, we cannot
speak about the properties of the observed object without taking into
account the state of motion of the observer. Davies explains:

       The essential element injected into physics by the theory of
       relativity is subjectivity. Fundamental things like duration,
       length, past, present and future can no longer be regarded as a
       dependable framework within which to live our lives. Instead
       they are flexible, elastic qualities, and their values depend on
       precisely who is measuring them. In this sense the observer is
       beginning to play a rather central role in the nature of the
       world.49
In a deeper sense, space-time framework itself becomes relative to the
observer. Theoretical physicist Mendel Sachs writes:

       The real revolution that came with Einstein's theory . . . was
       the abandonment of the idea that the space-time coordinate
       system has objective significance as a separate physical entity.
       Instead of this idea, relativity theory implies that the space
       and time coordinates are only the elements of a language that
       is used by an observer to describe his environment.50

Similarly, Davies states: “Space and time are not fixed, but are in a sense
elastic; they can stretch and shrink depending on who is observing
them.”51

     In quantum theory, the link between the observer and the observed
system goes much deeper. This relationship is much more bizarre and
strange. A number of renowned physicists have testified to this effect.
Davies is forthright when he says: “Quantum theory requires the
incorporation of the observer into the physical world in a still more
essential way.”52 Some physicists hold that the properties of quantum
objects do not exist unless and until they are observed by the observer.
Thus, John Barrow and Frank Tipler opine that “many physical properties
of atomic particles did not even exist before the act of observation; the act
of observation was necessary to bring these properties into existence.”53
Likewise, David Bohm writes:

       But in the usual interpretation of the quantum theory, an atom
       has no properties at all when it is not observed. Indeed, one
       may say that its only mode of being is to be observed; for the
       notion of an atom existing with uniquely definable properties
       of its own even when it is not interacting with a piece of
       observing apparatus, is meaningless within the framework of
       this point of view.54

     This means that these properties are not inherent in quantum object,
but instead they are relations or interactions between the observed object
and the observer. Capra remarks:

       The crucial feature of atomic physics is that the human
       observer is not only necessary to observe the properties of an
       object, but is necessary even to define these properties. In
       atomic physics, we cannot speak about the properties of an
       object as such. They are meaningful only in the context of the
       object's interaction with the observer.55

Babu Joseph shares a similar view when he says: “Quantum mechanics has
shown that the properties of a physical system that are investigated by an
observer (knower), depend on the observer's state. Since the observer is
the agency possessing knowledge, this interaction may be described as a
‘knowledge-physical system' interaction.”56 Moreover, it is even difficult
to speak about the separate existence of a quantum object apart from its
properties. Rae suggests: “If all properties of an object, its mass, position,
energy, etc., are quantum in nature and do not have values until they are
measured, it is hard to see any meaning in the object's separate
existence.”57 This is in fact ‘quantum idealism.'

     Incidentally, the ‘subjective idealism' of the British philosopher
George Berkeley (1685-1753) appears to be very similar to ‘quantum
idealism.' Historians of philosophy, Gunnar Skirbekk and Nils Gilje
summarize his thought: “The first step in Berkeley's immaterialism
[idealism] is thus the rejection of the idea that matter is something
different from [its] properties; the second step is an interpretation of the
properties as sense impressions.”58 According to Berkeley's view, matter
does not exist apart from its properties which are known through our sense
impressions. Since sense impressions exist only when they are perceived,
matter too exists only when it is perceived. Philosophically, this position is
expressed as “esse est percipi;” that is, “to be or to exist is to be
perceived.” In simple words, it means that a physical object exists only
when it is perceived. In the present context, we can render this statement
as follows: the properties of quantum objects exist only when they are
observed; and since these objects have no existence apart from their
properties, quantum objects exist only when they are observed. In fact,
Heisenberg has stated as much when he said: “The conception of objective
reality . . . evaporated into . . . the mathematics that represents no longer
the behavior of elementary particles but rather our knowledge of this
behavior.”59 Some authors have explicitly identified Berkeley's thought
with quantum mechanics. Coveney and Highfield suggest: “It [quantum
theory] is the modern version of Bishop Berkeley's famous denial of the
existence of the tree in the quadrangle at New College, Oxford when he
turned his back on it.”60

     Now the question is, how can we substantiate the claim that
properties of quantum objects, such as an electron, depend on the
observer? The answer is that these properties are dependent on
experimental conditions; and that it is the observer who chooses
experimental set up. The observer decides which measurement set up is to
be chosen in order to determine the properties of an observed object. If the
experimental conditions are modified, then the properties of observed
object will also be different. Prigogine and Stengers remark:

       All description [of the measurement of a quantum system]
       thus implies a choice of the measurement device, a choice of
       the question asked. In this sense, the answer, the result, of the
       measurement, does not give us access to a given reality. We
       have to decide which measurement we are going to perform
       and which question our experiments will ask the system.61

Thus for instance, in double-slit experiment and photoelectric effect, the
observer's decision about observing photons determines their properties to
some extent. If the observer asks them a wave-question, they will give a
wave-answer; but if the observer asks photons a particle-question, they
will give a particle-answer. It is the observer who makes the choice as to
what to observe - wave or particle. We can demonstrate that light is a wave
in double-slit experiment, and that light consists of particles in
photoelectric effect. Both of these complementary aspects of light (wave
and particle) are necessary in order to understand the nature of light. It is
meaningless to ask what light really is. Light behaves as waves or as
particles depending upon which experiment we choose to perform, and
which question we ask. Wave and particle are properties of light as it
interacts with the observer. The wave-like behaviour that we observe in
doubleslit experiment is not a property of light; it is a property of our
interaction with light. Similarly, the particle-like character observed in
photoelectric effect is not a property of light, but a property of our
interaction with light. Thus, wave-like behaviour and particlelike
behaviour are properties of our interactions with light. Since these
properties are now known to belong, not to light itself, but to observer's
interaction with light, it is argued that light has no properties independent
of the observer.

     Similarly, the properties of position and velocity of quantum objects
too are dependent on experimental arrangements, and so, on the observer.
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle states that if the value of a physical
quantity is certain, then the value of its complementary quantity is
uncertain. Hence, it is impossible to measure with certainty both the
position and velocity of a quantum particle like an electron at the same
time. Consequently, when observing such a particle, we may choose to
measure either its position or its momentum. We can obtain either a
precise knowledge about the particle's position, but remain uncertain about
its momentum, or vice versa. The choice to measure either of the two
properties depends on the observer. John Wheeler says: “The position (or
momentum) of an object only acquires useful meaning through the
participatory act of observation.”62

     We wind up the present chapter on “The Quantum World and the
Observer,” with some quotes from eminent quantum physicists on the
profound involvement of the observer/consciousness in the quantum world
and in the universe itself. Great physicists, like Niels Bohr, Werner
Heisenberg, Max Born, Arthur Eddington, Andrei Linde and John
Wheeler, have strongly endorsed the view that the observed quantum
system and the observer are intimately related. According to Wheeler, the
most important feature of quantum mechanics is this deep relationship
between the two; and so he replaces the word ‘observer' by the word
‘participator': “To describe what has happened [measurement of a quantum
system], one has to cross out that old word ‘observer' and put in its place
the new word ‘participator.' In some strange sense, the universe is a
participatory universe.”63 Obviously, Wheeler implies that mind or
consciousness plays a fundamental role in quantum processes and the
universe.

     The reputed cosmologist Andrei Linde who proposed the theory of
chaotic inflation, asserted as much when he said: “Thus we see that
without introducing the observer, we have a dead universe, which does not
evolve in time.”64 He is reported to have gone further and suggested: “We
are together, the universe and us. The moment you say that the universe
exists without any observers, I cannot make any sense out of that. I cannot
imagine a consistent theory of everything that ignores consciousness. . . .
In the absence of observers, our universe is dead.”65 Arthur Eddington
voices a similar opinion:

       Recognizing that the physical world is entirely abstract and
       without ‘actuality' apart from its linkage to consciousness, we
       restore consciousness to the fundamental position instead of
       representing it as an inessential complication occasionally
       found in the midst of inorganic nature at a late stage of
       evolutionary history.66

Davies shares a similar view when he says:

       Perhaps more than anything else this conclusion carries the
       greatest significance of the quantum revolution, for unlike all
       the previous scientific revolutions, which have successively
       demoted mankind from the centre of creation to the role of
       mere spectator of the cosmic drama, quantum theory
       reinstates the observer at the centre of the stage.67

Apparently, Eugene Wigner goes so far as to affirm the supremacy of
consciousness: “It will remain remarkable in whatever way our future
concepts may develop, that the very study of the external world led to the
conclusion that the content of the consciousness is an ultimate reality.”68
Truly, unlike the classical mechanics which exiled consciousness from the
world, quantum mechanics appears to have placed it at the center of the
universe.69
                                      6
                THE QUANTUM COSMOLOGY
       Maybe the universe itself sprang into existence out of
       nothingness -- a gigantic vacuum fluctuation which we know
       today as the big bang.

                    –Heinz Pagels, The Cosmic Code

     Cosmology is physics applied to the universe as a whole. The Big
Bang theory is actually the end product of the application of Einstein's
general theory of relativity to the entire universe. From the general theory
to the Big Bang theory, it is just a small step. Similarly, it is a short
distance from quantum field theories to quantum cosmology. We had
discussed about the creation of particles and anti-particles when we dealt
with quantum field theories and quantum vacuum. Thence quantum
cosmology -- the quantum creation of the universe - is only a short
distance. Davies observes: “Combining the two extreme ends of physics -
cosmology, the study of the universe, and quantum mechanics, the study of
atomic and subatomic systems - is ambitious by any standard.”1 However,
such speculations, Hawley and Holocomb warn us, “can as yet be no better
than educated guesswork, and may prove to be nonsense.”2 Nonetheless,
some cosmologists have dared to engage in such bold ‘educated guesswork'
regarding the quantum origin and end of the universe. They have advocated
different versions of quantum cosmology. Renowned physicists Andrei
Linde, Alex Vilenkin and Edward Tryon have put forward theories, known
as ‘chaotic inflation' and ‘eternal inflation.' These theories suggest that our
universe originated as the outcome of a primordial quantum vacuum
fluctuation. The theory of quantum creation of the universe is
complemented by a theory of its quantum destruction - the Big Decay.

6.1. The Quantum Origins of the Universe
     No comprehensive discourse on the quantum origins of the universe
would be complete without also discussing about the theory of its Big Bang
creation. In particular, we have to explain how to conceptually ‘tame' Big
Bang singularity. Reputed physicists Stephen Hawking and James Hartle,
and John Wheeler have proposed theories as to how to ‘handle' this
supposed primordial state of the universe. These discussions take us to the
quantum creation of the universe - the quantum cosmology.

6.1.1. ‘Taming' Big Bang Singularity

      We start the saga of Big Bang creation with the concept of Big Bang
singularity. This idea, we saw, has its origin in the ‘singularity theorems'
invented by Stephen Hawking and Roger Penrose in 1964.3 They
demonstrated that every solution to Einstein's general theory of relativity
eventually develops a state of singularity. Singularity is a region in space-
time at which some physical quantity of a star, like density of mass/energy,
temperature or strength of gravitational field (curvature of space-time)
becomes infinite. Such a state of the star would be a black hole. Hawking
and Penrose further showed that our universe would have had a space-time
singularity at the beginning of its Big Bang expansion. Now, in the
framework of the Big Bang model, this state of singularity would be
reached by specifying the antecedent states of the present universe, and
working all the way ‘back' to its beginning. In the equations used to model
the origin of the universe, this beginning is referred by the time parameter
t; and in many cosmological models, there is a singularity at t = 0.
“According to the standard model, at time zero (by definition) the universe
had infinite matter density, infinite curvature and infinite temperature — a
state known as ‘singularity.'”4 In other words, the limit or the beginning of
succession of hotter and denser phases of the present universe is a point
where density and temperature are infinite. Cosmologists refer to it as
‘initial singularity,' or ‘Big Bang singularity,' and they call it the
‘beginning' of the universe at time zero.

     What is significant in this brief description of the Big Bang model of
the universe is the important role of time. Time decisively enters into the
conceptual framework of the Big Bang theory. The Big Bang singularity is
the regime of physical reality ‘where' time is supposedly zero, and it
represents the time ‘when' the universe purportedly originated. Hawking
tells us: “If the classical theory of general relativity was correct, the
singularity theorem showed that the beginning of time would have been a
point of infinite density and curvature [that is, singularity].”5 Singularity is
thus the end product of the general theory of relativity. According to this
theory, the density distribution of mass/energy in the universe determines
the curvature space-time. This relation between mass/energy and spacetime
has profound implications for the origin of the universe. For, if the general
theory is applied indiscriminately back to the beginning of the universe, it
predicts that space-time curvature would become infinite. Such an infinite
space-time warpage is supposedly Big Bang singularity at time zero.
Davies warns: “In the context of the big bang origin of the universe and the
possible presence of an initial singularity, the Planck time serves as a
warning: we should not trust general relativity when extrapolated to within
one Planck time of the origin.”6

     However, what is intriguing is that we do not encounter such a
singularity or a temporal beginning of the universe in Newtonian
cosmology; its conceptual structure cannot, and so does not, admit such a
supposed state of the universe. The reason is that according to Newtonian
mechanics, time does not enter into the constitution of the universe
although it is a category to describe cosmic phenomena. Newton speaks of
time as follows: “Absolute true and mathematical time, of itself and by its
own nature, flows uniformly, without regard to anything external.”7 Capek
comments:

       According to this view time flows no matter whether
       something changes or not; in its own nature time is empty and
       is only in an accessory and contingent way filled by changes.
       Changes are in time; they are not time itself. This distinction
       between time and concrete becoming is at the very foundations
       of classical physics.8

Time, like Newtonian space, is completely indifferent to all changes in the
universe; and so “no changes, whether observable or not, can be produced
by the mere flow of time.”9 Thus, time in no way affects changes in the
universe nor does the universe influence time. Hence, Capek speaks of “the
accidental and superficial character of time in the [Newtonian] mechanistic
scheme.”10

     Classical mechanics considered time “an ‘accident of accidents' which
was, so to speak, twice removed from the solid, fundamental reality of
matter and space.”11 Capek further observes: “Thus the lapse of time is a
mere accident: matter and its laws are the same whether we consider them
within cosmic aeons or within excessively minute intervals of time.”12
Philosopher-mathematician Alfred North Whitehead remarks about the
‘accidental' character of time:

       This fact that the material is indifferent to the division of time
       leads to the conclusion that the lapse of time is an accident,
       rather than of the essence of the material. The material is fully
       itself in any sub-period however short. Thus the transition of
       time has nothing to do with the character of the material. The
       material is equally itself at any instant of time.13

The Newtonian mechanics in effect thus eliminates time from fabric of
physical reality - of the universe.14 Since time is not essential but
accidental in the Newtonian universe, the universe would be static, not
dynamic. Such a universe would have no antecedent states, finally ending
up with a state having infinite density and infinite curvature as in the Big
Bang model; and so the universe would have no beginning with Big Bang
singularity at time zero.

      However, this whole scenario undergoes a radical change with the
advent of Einstein's theory of relativity. What is significant here is that
according to relativity, time enters in an essential way into the constitution
of the universe. Arthur Peacocke aptly remarks: “Time in modern
relativistic physics is an integral and basic aspect of nature. Space and time
have to be mutually defined in interlocking relations and both are related to
definitions of mass and energy, themselves interconvertible. So matter,
energy, and space-time constitute the created order.”15 Capek speaks about
the ‘ontological priority of time over space' in the theory of relativity.16 In
order to emphasize this priority of time, he refers to the unification of
space and time in the special theory as ‘time-space' rather than ‘space-
time,' as is customarily used. Capek writes: “Thus it is more accurate to
speak of time-space than of space-time.”17 He expresses the same idea
alternatively when he says that “the fusion of space and time is more
accurately characterized as a temporalization or dynamization of space than
as a spatialization of time.”18

      In short, the great accomplishment of the theory of relativity is
precisely this temporalization or dynamization of space. Such
dynamization of space is more evident in the general theory than in the
special theory. The special theory unified space and time into space-time or
rather time-space. The general theory, while retaining the fusion of space
and time effected by the special theory, removed the classical distinction
between space-time and matter, and “intimately related [them] in a single
package deal.”19 Thus, the general theory unifies space-time with
mass/energy and with it the integration of time into the structure of
physical reality is complete. Space-time and mass/energy are fused into
one single dynamic whole. Space, time, matter and motion -- the four
absolutes of Newtonian mechanics - are inextricably linked rendering them
relative. This linkage results in space-time curvature in the presence of
mass/energy; and such space-time warpage is called gravity. As the density
of mass/energy increases, space-time curvature/gravity also increases
inexorably. If this law is applied to the universe as whole, the resulting
model would result in Big Bang singularity at time zero. Hence, in the last
analysis, singularity is the final outcome of the relativistic unification of
space-time/mass/energy. The whole structure of the universe is rendered
dynamic. The space-time/mass/ energy regime of the universe is dynamic
and evolutionary.

     The foregoing reflections on the conceptual foundations of Newtonian
physics and the theory of relativity provide the right setting to discuss the
mechanics of ‘taming' Big Bang singularity. Obviously, the Big Bang model
describes a dynamic universe which had a beginning and will have an end.
According to this theory, we saw, there is supposedly a singularity in the
beginning of the universe at time zero. This means that in order to ‘handle'
singularity, we have to ‘flush out' or eliminate time zero from the Big Bang
model. As we have seen,20 the quantum field theory that ‘manages' the
singularity regime and Planck magnitudes is the quantum theory of gravity.
Coveney and Highfield aptly suggest: “Nevertheless, it is widely believed
by cosmologists that a successful quantum version of gravity would
transcend the singularity problems arising in general relativity, . . .”21 The
point here is that quantum effects begin to affect space-time domain at the
extremely minute Planck scales on account of uncertainty principle. Under
such scenario, space-time structure is not continuous and smooth, as in
Newtonian mechanics and the theory of relativity, but needs quantum
mechanical treatment. In other words, gravitational field (space-time
curvature) has to be quantized, and so a quantum description of space-time
along with mass-energy at the singularity regime and Planck dimensions is
required. William Stoeger speaks about the possible modification of space-
time structure at this setting:

       If this is correct, then space and time are not continuous in this
       primordial phase, but give way to some other more
       fundamental realities — very different from the space and time
       with which we are familiar. These quantum space-time
       realities, whatever they turn out to be, then yield or give birth
       to our space-time continuum once the temperature of the
       universe falls below 1032 degrees Kelvin.22

Stoeger further explains about the two modalities of time:

       Instead, there may have been some material quantum reality
       integrated with some quantized space-time reality, whatever
       that would have been, in which time as we know it was hidden,
       and from which it only gradually emerged. Time would then
       have a beginning and be finite in the past, but in its primordial
       ‘spatial' form, it might also be unbounded as well, and would
       have an origin which was different from that of created reality
       itself.23

From this sort of ‘primordial' time, the ‘real' time that we experience,
gradually emerges. This is the sum and substance of the ‘no boundary'
model proposed by Hawking and Hartle.

      In fact, the no boundary model is Hawking's method of ‘taming' Big
Bang singularity by ‘flushing out' time. John Gribbin observes: “Physics
can't cope with infinities, or singularities, but he [Hawking] has done away
with both by removing the ‘moment of creation' with its implication of a
state of infinite density in the beginning of the Universe.”24 At one stroke,
Hawking has eliminated infinities and Big Bang singularity, and he has
accomplished this by doing away with the moment of creation of the
universe altogether. According to him, the moment of creation is the
boundary of time, that is, time zero. This boundary represents the Big Bang
singularity which, we saw, is the result of applying the general theory of
relativity uncritically past Planck magnitudes. Gribbin remarks: “Hawking
has tried to do away with the singularity, improving general relativity by
including aspects of quantum physics in the description of the universe.”25
Hawking explains his proposal briefly:

       When quantum mechanics is taken into account, there is the
       possibility that the singularity may be smeared out and that
       space and time together may form a closed four-dimensional
       surface without a boundary or edge, like the surface of the
       Earth but with two extra dimensions. This would mean that . . .
       there would not be any singularities at which the laws of
       physics would break down.26

      The key feature of Hawking's no boundary model consists in the
proposal that Heisenberg's uncertainty principle blurs the distinction
between space and time at the Planck domain. The quantum uncertainty
relation predicts that space and time become ill-defined at the Planck
dimensions. But more than that, quantum fuzziness entails smearing the
separate identities of space and time. Thus, if we imagine going back in
time to the Big Bang regime of the universe, when we reach the Planck
time, quantum uncertainties would remove the distinction between space
and time; and concepts, such as ‘before' and ‘after,' lose their meaning. In
other words, the effect of uncertainty principle would modify the basic
distinction between space and time. To use Hawking's terminology, time is
‘smeared' into space and becomes ‘imaginary.' We might say that time
becomes ‘spatialized.' Davies explains this scenario:

       In daily life, space is space, and time is time - there is no
       ambiguity - even though space and time are nearly the same
       thing, being part and parcel of a unified spacetime. But in the
       quantum realm their distinct identities become blurred.
       Sometimes intervals of time behave like intervals of space, and
       vice versa: space becomes time-like and time becomes
       spacelike. The resulting identity crises -- quantum fluctuations
       in spaceness and timeness -- are exceedingly small: in fact,
       they are more or less restricted to Planck lengths and times.
       But in the context of the origin of the universe they could be
       immensely significant.27

     According to Hawking's theory, at the Planck scales there is no longer
time dimension, but only four space-like dimensions. The radical character
of this approach is that it regards time as truly spacelike in the ultimate
quantum gravitational domain of the Big Bang. As one approaches the
beginning of the universe, the conventional time disappears; and time
becomes indistinguishable from space as the effects of boundary conditions
are felt. Calculations suggest that this might be the state of affairs at the
beginning of the universe -- during the first minute fraction of a second.
The question then arises as to the geometry of the four-dimensional space
which has to somehow smoothly join onto the more familiar space-time,
once the quantum smearing effects subside. And we may also ask which is
the ‘real' time? Hawking argues:

       The singularity theorems of classical general relativity showed
       that the universe must have a beginning, and that this
       beginning must be described in terms of quantum theory. This
       in turn led to the idea that the universe could be finite in
       imaginary time, but without boundaries or singularities. When
       one goes back to the real time in which we live, however, there
       will still appear to be singularities. . . .
       This might suggest that the so-called imaginary time is really
       the fundamental time, and that what we call real time is
       something we create just in our minds. In real time, the
       universe has a beginning and an end at singularities that form a
       boundary to space-time and at which the laws of science break
       down. But in imaginary time, there are no singularities or
       boundaries. So maybe what we call imaginary time is really
       more basic, and what we call real time is just an idea that we
       invent to help us describe what we think the universe is like.28

Hawking thus ‘tames' Big Bang singularity by ‘flushing out' real time and
by the same token introducing imaginary time. He summarizes his position
as follows: “Only if we could picture the universe in terms of imaginary
time would there be no singularities.”29

    With help of two figures, Davies explains Hawking's method of
taming singularity by flushing out time.
  Figure 23. Space-time singularity (Courtesy: Paul Davies,
                     Goldilocks Enigma)

     Figure 23 is a schematic representation of the expanding universe.
Time is represented vertically and space horizontally. We observe that as
the universe is expanding, the radius of circle is becoming bigger at later
times. Conversely, in the past it is smaller, until at the beginning of time,
denoted by t = 0, it shrinks to nothing; this is the purported Big Bang
singularity at the beginning of the universe. This series of events is shown
in the figure schematically by the apex of an inverted cone. The region
below the cone, marked ‘nothing', which seems to lie ‘before' or ‘beyond'
the Big Bang, does not exist as a physical region in this model. Both time
and space start at the singularity.30




  Figure 24. The Quantum origin of the universe (Courtesy:
              Paul Davies, Goldilocks Enigma)

      Figure 24 displays Hawking's suggestion to eliminate singularity by
flushing out time. The effects of quantum uncertainty transform the
structure of cone near apex so that the infinitely sharp point, representing
space-time singularity, gets replaced by a rounded bowl. The radius of this
bowl is supposedly about one Planck length, extraordinarily tiny by human
standards, but not actually zero. The singularity has therefore been
eliminated in this illustration. Figure 24 shows that as we advance towards
(supposed) time zero, just before we reach the singular terminating event
(about one Planck time before it), time itself starts getting fuzzy, and
begins to adopt more and more space-like character. Thus, at the ‘base of
the bowl,' close to the beginning of the universe, time becomes space-like
as a result of quantum mechanical effects. Such is the concept of Hawking's
imaginary time. Imaginary time, we saw, behaves as if it were a dimension
of space in such a way that we can move forwards and backwards along it,
just as we can move right and left, or up and down in space. Time does not
change abruptly into space, but fades away in a continuous manner. Thus,
when visualized in imaginary time, the singularity and time zero are
eliminated.31
      Incidentally, it is significant that what produced Big Bang singularity,
and also what eliminated it, are the dynamics between space and time. The
theory of relativity in the last analysis, we said quoting Capek, involves a
temporalization of space rather than a spatialization of time. As Capek
suggests, relativity accords ontological priority to time over space. It is
such temporalization of space and ontological priority given to time that
produced singularity in the Big Bang model. However, these concepts are
in direct conflict with the principles of the no boundary model of Hawking
and Hartle. The fundamental principle in this model is the ontological
priority of space over time; but the space in question is not Newtonian, but
a four-dimensional manifold. Hence, it appears that the no boundary model
supposes spatialization of time rather than temporalization of space as in
the theory of relativity. By the same token, it has eliminated Big Bang
singularity and time zero which were the products of the general theory of
relativity. Obviously, Hawking's concept of space is very different from
Newtonian space; in a word, the former is four-dimensional while the latter
is three-dimensional, each with diverse, attendant properties.

     We conclude with Davies: “But the quantum effects of gravity should
dramatically alter all the stuff about singularities and the ultimate origin of
the universe. It was the realization of this that led to the creation of a new
field of study: quantum cosmology.”32

6.1.2. The Vacuum Creation of the Universe

     With our presentations of quantum theory of gravity and quantum
vacuum in the fourth chapter, and the foregoing narrative on taming Big
Bang singularity, we have hopefully prepared the ground for our discourse
on quantum cosmology -- the quantum origins of the universe -- often
dubbed ‘vacuum creation.' Andrei Linde has proposed a theory of quantum
cosmology called ‘chaotic inflation' or ‘eternal inflation.' Edward Tryon
and Alex Vilenkin also have developed similar models of chaotic inflation;
it is the application of quantum theory to the entire Cosmos. These
quantum cosmologists believe that our present universe came into
existence as a result of a colossal quantum vacuum fluctuation. Pagels
observes: “Maybe the universe itself sprang into existence out of
nothingness -- a gigantic vacuum fluctuation which we know today as the
big bang.”33 Physicists have employed, as we saw, a number of terms in
order to refer to the quantum vacuum: ‘superspace' (Davies), ‘super-
spacetime' (Gribbin), ‘the original mother Universe' (Katsuhiko Sato), and
‘Mother Spacetime' (Willem B. Drees).34 “Superspacetime, not a
singularity or an antecedent cosmic epoch, is the ultimate Antecedent
Universe in these theories [of quantum cosmology]; it produces all Big
Bangs, including our own. Maternal Superspacetime is the space beyond
our space, and the time before, during, and after our time.”35

     Now, what is the mechanism by which superspacetime generates
universes like our own? That mechanism is called ‘eternal inflation.'
Davies writes: “Eternal inflation therefore offers an inexhaustible universe-
generating mechanism, of which our universe — our bubble — is but one
product.”36 Other appellations for this mechanism are ‘vacuum fluctuation'
or ‘quantum fluctuation.' It is, as we saw, the quantum process by which
particles and anti-particles are created and annihilated. It is indeed a dance
between being and non-being. Pagels says: “The vacuum randomly
fluctuates between being and nothingness.”37 In quantum fluctuation,
virtual particles and anti-particles are constantly created, and they
annihilate each other by converting themselves into the energy of the
vacuum. The uncertainty principle permits to ‘borrow' energy required to
produce these particles and antiparticles from the vacuum itself; and the
‘debt' is quickly ‘repaid' when particles and anti-particles annihilate each
other. These are short-lived because the energy tied up in them has to be
repaid after an extremely minute fraction of a second - within the time
permitted by uncertainty relation. Such processes of creations and
annihilations have been confirmed by many experiments. Physicists have
observed similar quantum fluctuations in laboratories down to distances of
about 10-16 cm and over times of about 10-26 sec.

     However, at the Planck scales, quantum fluctuations would begin to
affect space-time itself. Space-time comes into being spontaneously and
uncaused through quantum fluctuations. Each such region of space-time
would be only about 10-33 cm across, and it generally survives for a mere
10-43 sec. (Planck scales) Like virtual particles, the quantum bubbles of
virtual space-time disappear almost as soon as they come into being.
Quantum vacuum would produce an infinite number of ‘bubbles' of
‘virtual' space-time which come into existence and disappear as permitted
by uncertainty principle. Gal-Or tells us: “Super-space at these scales may
be compared to a ‘carpet of foam' in which the millions of tiny ‘bubbles'
having different shapes are continually ‘bursting' as new ones are being
formed.”38 These tiny bubbles are called ‘child' or ‘baby' universes. The
entire cosmos may consist of an infinite and eternal set of such baby/child
universes connected to each other in a very complicated way. (See Figure
25) Davies suggests: “The ‘mother' universe which spawned ours is also
continuously inflating at a fantastic rate, and spewing out baby universes
for all it is worth. If this state of affairs is correct, it implies that ‘our'
universe is only part of an infinite assemblage of universes, although it is
self-contained now.”39 Similarly, Drees observes that according to this view,
“a mini-universe appears as a bubble on the ‘surface' of the mother and,
after evaporation of the connection, it becomes spatially disconnected.”40




       Figure 25. ‘Mother' universe and ‘child' universes
     Thus, an infinite number of universes are created by, and co-exist
within, infinite superspacetime which includes, but transcends the finite
space-time of our own universe. Such co-existing child universes ‘live and
move and have their being' within Mother Space-time without influencing
one another. The child universes are so far apart in Mother Space-time that
they cannot act causally on one another, even at the speed of light, except
possibly through worm holes.41 In infinite Superspacetime, an infinite
number of co-existent, child universes could all be infinitely far apart. Our
universe is one such bubble-child. After its spontaneous generation from
Mother Space-time, a child universe may expand or contract forever. Some
cosmologists identify creation of a child universe like ours with the Big
Bang. Davies observes: “In the theory of eternal inflation, the big bang is
no longer the ultimate origin of all physical things. Rather, it is the
beginning of the history of our ‘bubble', or pocket universe, embedded in
an eternally inflating superspace.”42 Similarly, Drees speaks of the origin of
our universe in biological terms of conception and birth: “The Singularity
might be something like birth or conception, being, as it were, the
beginning of time from the perspective of the baby or an event in time as
seen by the mother. As ‘conception' the Universe is like a bubble within an
embedding space-time.”43

     John Gribbin thinks that chaotic inflation is the ultimate theory about
the universe:

       The idea of chaotic inflation led to what is (so far) the ultimate
       development of the inflationary scenario. The great
       unanswered question in standard Big Bang cosmology is what
       came ‘before' the singularity. It is often said that the question
       is meaningless, since time itself began at the singularity. But
       chaotic inflation suggests that our Universe grew out of a
       quantum fluctuation in some pre-existing region of spacetime,
       and that exactly equivalent processes can create regions of
       inflation within our own Universe. In effect, new universes bud
       off from our Universe, and our Universe may itself have
       budded off from another universe, in a process which had no
       beginning and will have no end.44
     Davies sums up the products of eternal inflation: “What we have all
along been calling ‘the universe' is, in this theory [of chaotic inflation], just
an infinitesimal part of a single ‘bubble', or pocket universe, set amid an
infinite assemblage of universes — a multiverse — itself embedded in
inflating space that exists without end.”45

6.1.3. The Inflationary Universe

     Indeed, an enormously massive fluctuation of the quantum vacuum
could occur in principle creating a bubble/child universe. But it would be
exceedingly small, and would have an enormous gravitational field. The
result would be an extremely rapid collapse, snuffing the embryonic
universe out of existence as quickly as any pair of virtual particles
produced in quantum vacuum. Like virtual particles, the quantum bubbles
of virtual space-time disappear almost as soon as they come into existence.
Most of the bubble universes might turn into black holes on account of
their extreme gravity. However, many quantum cosmologists believe that
occasionally a minute blob of space-time, a virtual bubble universe of
unimaginably small size, might have avoided a rapid gravitational collapse
and become promoted to the real, astronomically large universe like ours.46
In order to achieve this extraordinary feat, the child universe must
somehow avoid the crushing barrier of gravity which tries to squeeze the
universe back to nothing. Somehow the nascent universe has to boost its
size from almost nothing to literally cosmic proportions of the present
universe. Something must trigger this process very rapidly during the split
second for which a quantum fluctuation is normally allowed to exist. What
is needed is a titanic, repulsive force which can overwhelm the attractive
grip of gravity and set the universe on a path of expansion. That is, there
should be a suitable mechanism in order to promote the virtual child
universe into the real universe similar to ours. That mechanism is called
‘inflation.' A tiny bubble of space-time burst spontaneously into existence
as a result of quantum fluctuation, whereupon inflation seizes it, and the
bubble swells to macroscopic dimensions. The nascent universe
exponentially inflates within an extremely small period of time. Gribbin
says: “In the tiny fraction of a second it exists, inflation can set to work and
blow the seed up into a full-size universe.”47
      According to the theory of inflation, the embryonic universe found
itself in an ‘excited' or ‘false' vacuum state. The vacuum could become
‘excited' and adopt a number of very different states of energy in the same
way as an atom can be excited to higher energy levels. The energy levels
leaps by huge amounts from one vacuum state to another. The excited state
of quantum vacuum is a state of high energy which physicists call ‘false
vacuum.' The false vacuum differs from ‘true vacuum' in so far as the false
vacuum possesses extremely high energy density of about 1074 gm/cm3.
(See Figure 26)




            Figure 26. False vacuum and true vacuum
      In this state, the excited vacuum would behave like a gigantic cosmic
repulsion force of such an enormous magnitude that it would cause
headlong expansion of the universe at a colossal rate. A typical region of
space would double in size in every 10-35 sec, that is, every hundred trillion-
trillion-trillionths of a second. The radius of the tiny universe would have
increased by a million million million million million times in only an
extremely minute fraction of a second; it would increase in size from 10-26
cm to about 10 cm. The minuscule universe would have expanded by a
factor of at least 1050 in volume. It was as if a coin, one centimeter in
diameter, suddenly blew up to the size of the Milky Way galaxy. The
universe would have gone on doubling every 10-35 sec so long as it
remained in the grip of the huge cosmic repulsive force. The inflationary
epoch lasted from 10-34 sec after the Big Bang to 10-32 sec.48 This pattern of
expansion is called ‘exponential,' and it results in an extremely rapid
increase in the magnitude of the universe. (See Figure 27)




                 Figure 27. Inflation of the universe
This stage of accelerated expansion is known as the ‘inflationary universe.'
Without the inflationary stage of expansion, the universe would have
expanded only tenfold during the interval between 10-34 sec to 10-32 sec after
the Big Bang, while the inflation would blow it out by a factor of 1050 in
volume. In contrast, the normal expansion of the universe from the size of
ten centimeters (that is, the size after inflation) to the present magnitude
during the fourteen billion years of its existence is just an expansion factor
of 1027, and appears quite modest.49

     The inflationary phase of frenetic and accelerated expansion of the
universe lasted only for an extremely brief duration -- from 10-34 sec after
the Big Bang to 10-32 sec. Like all excited states, inflationary state of the
universe is unstable. It is a general feature of any physical system that it
seeks out the state of lowest energy or ground state. This is true of excited
or false vacuum as well. Just as in the case of all excited quantum systems,
the excited false vacuum is unstable and would tend to ‘decay,' and attain
true vacuum of low energy level or ground state. The excited vacuum state
of the universe, being inherently unstable, decayed abruptly into true
vacuum, the lowest vacuum energy state or ground state which is the empty
space of the universe at present. The enormous reserves of energy locked
up in the false vacuum were, as a result, released in the form of heat and
particles of matter. This changeover from false vacuum to true vacuum is
called ‘phase transition.' The Russian cosmologist Igor Novikov says:

       The instability means that a phase transition becomes possible
       from the state of ‘false vacuum' with its huge density to a state
       in which the entire mass density (and the corresponding energy
       density) of the ‘false vacuum' transforms into the mass density
       of ordinary hot matter while the density of the true vacuum is
       zero or vanishingly low.50

The energy that was contained in false vacuum gives rise to an enormous
number of particles and anti-particles of ordinary matter, all having very
high energies. Once the inflation of the universe came to a halt, the cosmic
repulsive force also disappeared, and gravity assumed its usual attractive
role, acting as a brake on expansion. The universe continues to expand from
the initial impetus imparted by inflation, but at a steadily falling rate as at
present; and the expansion of the universe follows laws of evolution of the
standard model of the Big Bang theory.51

     After all these narrations of child/baby universes, our present universe
and mother universe (superspacetime), one may ask, which is the ‘real'
universe, or as it is usually asked, “will the real universe please stand up?”
In order to answer this question, some clarifications are called for. We start
with a working definition of the universe as ‘the totality or entirety of
physical reality.' When theories of chaotic inflation speak about mother
universe with the assemblage of child universes, they appear to refer to
such totality of physical reality. These physical entities are believed to be
beyond the boundaries of our present universe; they are regions of space
and time that are unobservable in principle. Apparently, the entirety of
physical reality is the mother universe together with child universes.
Gribbin reserves the term ‘Cosmos' to refer to this totality. On the other
hand, the word ‘universe' is used to signify our present physical world
which would be an insignificant region of this totality. Gribbin clarifies this
distinction:

       If we use ‘Universe' as the name for our own expanding bubble
       of space-time, everything that is in principle visible to our
       telescopes, then may be the term ‘Cosmos' can be used to refer
       to the entirety of space and time, within which (if the
       inflationary scenario is correct) there may be an indefinitely
       large number of other expanding bubbles of space-time, other
       Universes with which we can never communicate.52

Similarly, Davies refers to this entirety of physical reality when he writes:
“This [the entire cosmos] includes all of (possibly infinite) space, within
and beyond our horizon, plus all of its contents, . . . ”53

     In contrast to the Cosmos, our present universe represents “our own
expanding bubble of space-time, everything that is in principle visible to
our telescopes.” It refers to “the entire span of space and time accessible to
our instruments, now and in the future.”54 However, our universe is not
simply there, whole and entire, for us to observe. It had been expanding
ever since its origin in the Big Bang; it expands now, and will continue to
expand in the future. Since the time of the Big Bang 13.82 billion years ago
(14 billion in round terms), light can have travelled 14 billion light years,
and therefore we cannot see beyond this distance or boundary even in
principle, however powerful our instruments of observation are. This
boundary is called ‘visual horizon.' “The visual horizon is the limit of what
we can see or know directly via electromagnetic radiation.”55 Since we
cannot observe beyond this horizon, “the observable universe means
‘everything within this horizon'.”56 At the present epoch, this visual horizon
is about 14 billion light years in extent. That is to say, this region
constitutes the visible, observable universe for us.

6.2. The Quantum Destruction of the Universe

     Just as there is a theory of quantum creation of the universe, there is
also a hypothesis about its quantum destruction. Like quantum creation, the
quantum destruction is also the effect of the unpredictable behaviour of the
quantum vacuum. Referring to this cosmic catastrophe, Davies asks: “But
what about events of universe-wrecking proportions? Is it possible that a
convulsion can occur that would destroy the entire cosmos at a stroke — in
midlife, so to speak?”57 It is indeed frightening to think that it is an ever-
present possibility.

6.2.1. Energy Levels and Quantum Tunnelling

     The possibility of the quantum destruction of the universe through the
mechanism of a sudden decay of the quantum vacuum was proposed by two
reputed physicists Sidney Coleman and Frank De Luccia in 1980. It has to
do with the unpredictable behaviour of quantum vacuum, namely, vacuum
decay. Vacuum decay is based on certain fundamental assumptions of
physics, specifically, different energy levels, ground state of energy and
quantum ‘tunnelling.' First, one of the important concepts in physics is that
every physical system has an energy level which may be high or low.
Evidently, the higher the level is, the more the energy. For example, coal or
wood has a high level of energy; it can be burned, and the chemical energy
stored in it released as heat. The wood as ashes has now a lower energy
level than before its burning. Second, everything in the universe tries to
reach the ground state where it has as little energy as possible, and where it
is completely stable. A ball on a hill, for instance, is unstable, and has a lot
of potential energy. When disturbed, it will roll down the valley and lose its
potential energy in the process. The ball is now in its ground state and is
stable. Thus, if something has a lot of energy, it is unstable and would get
rid of it; it would reach its ground state and become stable. Everything in
our universe follows these two principles of energy levels and stability.

     Now, a quantum particle like an electron too has the lowest possible
energy level in the ground state and so is stable; in this state it is as close to
the nucleus of atom as possible. It leaves its ground state and jumps to a
higher orbit only if it becomes excited, that is, if it receives extra energy by
absorbing a photon. In the excited state, an electron has a higher energy
level than in ground state, and so it is unstable. In other words, if an
electron absorbs some energy from some other source (light for instance),
it will jump up to a state that is higher than its ground state. Since the
electron in this state is unstable, it would want to get back to its ground
state. But before it can return to this state of low energy, it must get rid off
its excess energy. The electron sheds this extra energy by emitting the
photon it absorbed, and then returns to the ground state and becomes stable.
(See Figure 28) That is, when the excitation ceases, the electron returns to
the lower, ground state, releasing energy in the form of




      Figure 28. Electron absorbing and emitting photon
     In quantum field theories, we saw, the quantum vacuum is the state
with lowest possible energy. Such a state is the true vacuum which is at
global minimum of energy -- lowest possible energy at the global level --
and so is stable; and it is commonly assumed that it coincides with the
physical vacuum state of our universe. However, it is possible that the
vacuum state of our universe is a configuration of quantum fields
representing a local minimum of energy, but does not coincide with global
minimum of energy. In this case, there exists a false vacuum at the local
minimum of energy (of our universe), which is not stable in contrast to the
true vacuum which is at the global minimum and is stable. This type of
false vacuum state is in fact an excited vacuum. In quantum field theories,
a false vacuum is a hypothetical vacuum that is not actively decaying; it is
not entirely stable, but ‘meta-stable.' It may last for a very long period of
time in that state (a property known as meta-stability), and might
eventually move to a more stable state -- a process known as ‘vacuum
decay.' Thus, higher energy states tend to decay into lower energy states,
and finally into ground state. An excited false vacuum with high energy
will try to decay to the lowest state of energy or true vacuum with lower
energy. The inflationary theory is based on the assumption that the very
early universe was in an excited or false vacuum state; during this period it
inflated frenetically, but in a very short time this state decayed to the
supposedly true vacuum and inflation ceased.58

      The third concept involved in vacuum decay is ‘quantum tunnelling.'
Quantum tunnelling is the phenomenon in which an object, usually an
elementary particle, tunnels through a potential barrier even though it does
not have sufficient energy to surmount the barrier. The central
characteristic of quantum tunnelling is that under certain conditions,
quantum particles are able to negotiate the obstacle of a potential barrier
without having sufficient energy to overcome it. But according to classical
mechanics, physical objects which do not have enough energy to get over a
barrier will not be able to do so. Particles attempting to cross over potential
barriers can be compared to a ball trying to reach the other side of a small
hill from the valley. A ball without sufficient energy to climb over the hill
would not be able to do so and go down to the other side. (See Figure 29)

      However according to quantum mechanics, quantum particles can,
with a very small probability, tunnel through the barrier to the other side,
even though they do not have sufficient energy to do so. This is called
‘quantum tunnelling.' Suppose a quantum particle, such as an electron, is
trapped before an insurmountable barrier of force; as in the foregoing
example, we can say that it sits in the valley of a hill. (This need not have
to be a real hill; it could be electric or nuclear force field.) In the absence
of the energy needed to surmount the hill or overcome the force barrier, the
electron appears to be trapped forever. But Heisenberg's uncertainty
principle, we know, permits energy to be borrowed from the vacuum for an
extremely short time provided it is paid back within that time. Hence, if the
electron can borrow enough energy to reach the top of the hill and get
across to the other side before having to pay the energy back (that is, within
the time allowed by uncertainty principle), it can escape from the valley. In
effect, it will have ‘tunnelled' through the barrier. Thus, if a quantum
particle is trapped in the valley of a hill, there is a small probability that it
can escape by borrowing energy and cross over to the other side of the hill;
it ‘tunnels' through the barrier. (See Figure 29) 59
               Figure 29. The Quantum tunnelling 60
     The probability of a quantum particle tunnelling out of the valley
depends very sensitively on both the ‘height' and ‘width' of the barrier. The
higher the barrier, the more energy the particle must borrow to reach the
top, and so according to the uncertainty principle, the shorter the duration
for the energy to be ‘paid back.' Hence, high barriers can be tunnelled
through, only if they are also thin, enabling the particle to traverse them
quickly enough to repay the energy loan on time. For this reason, the tunnel
effect is not noticed in daily life; macroscopic barriers are far too high and
wide for significant tunnelling to occur. On an atomic scale, however,
tunnelling is very common.

6.2.2. The Vacuum Decay

     Physicists Coleman and De Luccia have proposed a theory about the
total destruction of the universe through vacuum decay. Quantum
tunnelling purportedly functions as the mechanism for this ultimate
catastrophe. In figure 30, the present (supposedly false) vacuum state of the
universe corresponds to the base of valley A. The true vacuum, however,
corresponds to the base of valley B, which is lower than A. There would be
a small probability of state A decaying by tunnel effect into the truly stable
ground state B. That is, the higher energy state A of false vacuum would
tend to decay into the lower energy state B of true vacuum, but it is
deterred from doing so by the ‘hill' or force field that separates them.
Although the hill impedes decay, it does not entirely prevent it, on account
of the possible quantum tunnel effect; the system can tunnel through, from
valley A to valley B. If the present universe is the false vacuum state A,
and if it makes a transition to true vacuum state B, it would end up in
vacuum decay. If this theory is correct, then our universe is living on
borrowed time, hung up in valley A, but with an ever-present possibility
that it will tunnel into valley B at some arbitrary moment.61




  Figure 30. Quantum tunnelling from false to true vacuum
      The usual assumption is that the present state of the universe
corresponds to true vacuum with lowest state of energy. Coleman and De
Lucia consider the chilling possibility that the present vacuum state may
not be the true vacuum, but merely a long-lived, meta-stable, false vacuum
that has lulled us into a false sense of security because it has endured for a
few billion years. We know of many quantum systems, such as uranium
nuclei that have half-lives of billions of years. Suppose the present state of
the universe is in fact a false vacuum, it would decay. The ‘decay' here
refers to the catastrophic possibility that the present vacuum may suddenly
fail, and ground the universe into an even lower energy state.

     Coleman and De Luccia were able to model the decay of the present
vacuum state of the universe mathematically tracing the manner in which
the decay might occur. They found that the decay might start at a random
location in space in the form of a tiny bubble of true vacuum — ground
state of energy -- surrounded by unstable false vacuum which is the present
state of the universe. As soon as the bubble of true vacuum is formed, it
will expand at a rate that rapidly approaches the speed of light, engulfing
larger and larger regions of false vacuum and instantaneously converting it
into true vacuum. The energy difference between the two states is
concentrated in the ‘bubble wall' which sweeps across the universe spelling
destruction to everything on its path. The first moment we would know
about the existence of a true vacuum bubble would be when the wall has
arrived, and the quantum structure of our world suddenly changed. We
would not have any warning. Instantaneously, the nature of all subatomic
particles and their interactions would alter drastically; for example, protons
might immediately decay, in which case all matter would abruptly
evaporate. What is left would then find itself inside the bubble of true
vacuum; it would be a state of affairs very different from what we observe
at present. The most significant difference concerns gravitation. Coleman
and De Luccia found that the energy and pressure of the true vacuum would
create a gravitational field so intense that the region embraced by the
bubble would collapse in less than microseconds, even as the bubble wall
expands.62

      Vacuum decay would be the abrupt annihilation of everything, as the
bubble interior implodes into a space-time singularity. In short, it is an
instant Crunch. Coleman and De Luccia observe: “The possibility that we
are living in a false vacuum has never been a cheering one to contemplate.
Vacuum decay is the ultimate ecological catastrophe; in a new vacuum
there are new constants of nature; after vacuum decay, not only is life as we
know it impossible, so is chemistry as we know it.”63 Cosmologist Michael
Turner and physicist Frank Wilczek also have arrived at such a grim
conclusion: “From the point of view of microphysics, then, it is quite
conceivable that our vacuum is metastable . . . without warning a bubble of
true vacuum could nucleate somewhere in the Universe and move outwards
at the speed of light.”64

     Astrophysicist Piet Hut and cosmologist Martin Rees raise the
alarming specter that the formation of a catastrophic vacuum bubble might
be inadvertently triggered by particle physicists themselves in high energy
particle accelerators like the Large Hadron Collider (LHC). They speculate
that very high energy collision of subatomic particles might create
conditions, just for an instant in a very small region of space which would
stimulate vacuum to decay. Once such an event has occurred even on a
microscopic scale, the newly formed bubble of true vacuum would balloon
to astronomical proportions. However, as Hut and Rees point out, cosmic
rays which achieve higher energies than the particle accelerators have been
hitting nuclei in the Earth's atmosphere for billions of years without
triggering vacuum decay. Moreover, these speculations are based on the
validity of the quantum theories of gravity and quantum cosmology which
are yet to be established.65

    We conclude the final chapter of the present volume The Strange
World of Quantum Physics with a quote from Paul Davies:

       For thousands of years, human beings have contemplated the
       world about them and asked the great questions of existence:
       Why are we here? How did the universe begin? How will it
       end? How is world put together? Why is the way it is? For all
       of recorded human history, people have sought answers to such
       ‘ultimate' questions in religion and philosophy, or declared
       them to be completely beyond human comprehension. Today,
       however, many of these big questions are part of science, and
       scientists claim that they may be on the verge of providing
       answers.66

Indeed, quantum physics does make such claims.
                             EPILOGUE
       Because the theory of relativity did upset familiar notions, it
       was at first regarded as revolutionary. Nevertheless, this
       revolution affected only the outer boundary of reason, so to
       speak – its most superficial layer, the forms of sensible
       intuition [space and time]. . . . With quantum mechanics, it
       was not only our usual notions of space and time that were
       being questioned but also mental categories – those of cause
       and of substance; and even purely logical principles, such as
       those of identity and contradiction, appeared less secure.

         –R. Blanché, Contemporary Science and Rationalism

     The leifmotif of the present work The Strange World of Quantum
Physics is expressed by the word ‘strange' in the title. The book narrates
the saga of a very strange world - the microcosm of quantum objects and
fields. When scientists speak about this world and its various dimensions,
they invariably use words, like ‘weird,' ‘bizarre,' and ‘exotic.' It is the
counter-intuitive world of subatomic particles and interactions, so very
remote from the world of our everyday experience. Not only ordinary
mortals like us find quantum theory strange and weird, but also the great
quantum physicists themselves deem it bizarre. One of the works of
Richard Feynman has the title, QED: The Strange Theory of Light and
Matter. He wrote in this book: “[Quantum mechanics] describes nature as
absurd from the point of view of common sense. And it fully agrees with
experiment. So I hope you can accept nature as She is — absurd.”1 Niels
Bohr says: “Anyone who is not shocked by quantum theory has not
understood it.”2

     Bohr told Wolfgang Pauli after his presentation of Heisenberg's and
Pauli's non-linear field theory of elementary particles at Columbia
University in 1958: “We are all agreed that your theory is crazy. The
question that divides us is whether it is crazy enough to have a chance of
being correct.”3 Heisenberg has said: “I remember the discussions with
Bohr . . . and when at the end of the discussion I went alone for a walk in
the neighbouring park I repeated to myself again and again the question:
Can nature possibly be as absurd as it seemed to us in these atomic
experiments?”4 There are other eminent physicists who testify about
quantum weirdness. John Wheeler: “If you are not completely confused by
quantum mechanics, you do not understand it.” Einstein: “If it [quantum
theory] is correct, it signifies the end of physics as a science.” Roger
Penrose: “Quantum mechanics makes absolutely no sense.”5 Again another
quote from Richard Feynman: “On the other hand I think I can safely say
that nobody understands quantum mechanics.”6 Gary Zukav wryly asserts:
“Quantum physics is stranger than science fiction.”7

     Why do we ordinary people and great physicists alike say that the
world of quantum mechanics is strange? Obviously, what is strange is
extra-ordinary - in the literal sense of the term; and what is ordinary -
normal - is our world of common sense experience. As such, we may call
quantum physics ‘ab-normal'- literally. It represents a world which is out
of the ordinary or normal. Hans Reichenbach calls such ordinary, normal
world ‘the zone of the middle dimension.' It is the macrocosm situated
between the megacosm - the world of the very large (galaxies and stars) -
and microcosm - the world of the very small (subatomic particles and
quantum fields).8 Newton's mechanics represents the physics of this
ordinary world or macrocosm. In contrast to this macroworld of common
sense experience, the physical objects and events of the megaworld and of
the microworld appear to us extra-ordinary and strange. The objects of
megacosm, like Big Bang singularity, black holes, dark matter, dark
energy, quasars and neutron stars, are indeed strange entities of wonder
and fascination for us. The theory of relativity deals with these objects of
the megaworld.

     However, as we plunge into the microcosm, still more bizarre objects,
such as photons, electrons, protons, neutrons, positrons, quarks, and
various quantum fields await us. We are puzzled by the concepts of
quantum physics, such as wave-particles, uncertainty relation, wave
functions, non-locality, quantum vacuum, creation and annihilation of
particles and anti-particles, quantum tunnelling and smearing of space and
time; these are all ideas beyond our wildest imagination. “If the concepts
and predictions of relativity are often considered difficult and counter-
intuitive, many of the basic tenets and implications of quantum mechanics
may appear absolutely bizarre and inconceivable, but they have been
repeatedly proven to be true, and it is now one of the most rigorously
tested physical models of all time.”9 Similarly, Greene suggests that
“quantum mechanics absolutely and unequivocally shows us that a number
of basic concepts essential to our understanding of the familiar everyday
world fail to have any meaning when our focus narrows to the microscopic
realm.”10 John Polkinghorne suggests that the weird characteristics of
quantum objects are founded on superposition principle:

       All these strange aspects of the quantum world (uncertainty,
       wave/particle duality, quantum logic) arise from what Dirac
       correctly identified, as the basic feature which distinguishes
       quantum from Newtonian physics, the superposition principle.
       This states that in the quantum world we can mix together
       possibilities which in the Newtonian world are for ever
       separate and distinct.11

      Counter-intuitive concepts are employed also in the theory of
relativity. R. Blanché tells us: “Nevertheless, this revolution [of the theory
of relativity] affected only the outer boundary of reason, so to speak -- its
most superficial layer, the forms of sensible intuition [space and time].”12
The unification of space and time in the special theory leads on to strange
physical phenomena, like contraction of length, dilation of time, and
mass/energy conversion. The integration of space-time with mass/energy
in the general theory takes us to bizzare astronomical phenomena, such as
black holes and Big Bang singularity. However, the radical transformation
of our everyday concepts effected by by quantum physics goes much
deeper. It affects the fundamental categories of our understanding, namely,
those of substance and causality. Blanché says further: “With quantum
mechanics, it was not only our usual notions of space and time that were
being questioned but also mental categories -- those of cause and of
substance; and even purely logical principles, such as those of identity and
contradiction, appeared less secure.”13 Fritjoff Capra remarks about the
demolition of the notions of substance and causality: “Quantum theory has
demolished the classical concepts of solid objects [substance] and of
strictly deterministic laws [causality] of nature.”14 Capek speaks about the
break down of the concept of substance with the advent of quantum
physics:

       The extent of the contemporary crisis in physics cannot be
       fully grasped if we do not realize that the very concept of
       substance or thinghood has become questionable. The term
       ‘object' misleadingly suggests the permanence of a certain
       thing - more specifically, a constant conjunction of observable
       properties. But we already know that the alleged
       microphysical ‘objects' are not permanent; furthermore, not
       even within a single instant can they be characterized as
       conjunctions of position and velocity.15

     Truly, quantum physics has transformed beyond recognition our basic
categories of understanding the world, namely, substance and causality.
This is borne out by concepts, such as wave-particle duality, superposition
principle and uncertainty relation. Polkinghorne observes about
superposition principle: “The superposition principle illustrates one of the
general effects of the discovery of quantum mechanics - that it has brought
about an extension of the limits of what is conceivable.”16 Further,
quantum theory apparently wrecked the principle of causality - that every
effect has a cause. That was the consequence of Heisenberg's uncertainty
principle. As we have seen, according to this principle, in any
measurement we can know simultaneously with certainty only half of the
conjugate quantities, like position and velocity, energy and time. Such
decrepit knowledge of measurements leaves causality in a shambles.

     Moreover, quantum physics has shaken the very foundations of the
citadel of reason - logic itself. Without logic, no meaningful
communication is possible, and without it every written and spoken
language turns out to be a meaningless chatter. “Quantum theory extends
the limits of the conceivable to a quite remarkable degree, even including
the limits of logic itself.”17 Quantum mechanics has seriously challenged
the fundamental logical principles, such as distributive law and
commutative law. Polkinghorne suggests: “Even logic finds a modification
in the quantum world. The distributive law of classical, Boolean logic does
not hold for subatomic particles, and a new quantum logic is required to
mirror their idiosyncratic character.”18 The distributive law says that if the
statement “A is at X or Y,” is true, then it is true that either “A is at X” or
“A is at Y.” That is not so if A is an electron. In that case, A may be in a
state which is a superposition of the state (A at X) and the state (A at Y).
That is a quite different state from either of those two possibilities
separately, as stated by distributive law. Quantum theory superposes these
two classical incompatibles. Polkinghorne suggests: “Quantum theory
permits the mixing together of what was classically immiscible.”19

     Similarly, quantum physics violates the commutative law of Boolean
logic, namely, (p x q) = (q x p). But classical, Newtonian physics does
obey this law because its variables for position and momentum of a
particle, for instance, are simple numbers. Thus, the position (q) of a
particle from a fixed point may be 5 feet (q = 5); its momentum (p = mass
of particle times its velocity) may be designated by 3 (p = 3). These
simple numbers 5 and 3 obey commutative law of multiplication: that is,
(3 x 5) = (5 x 3) = 15; the order of these numbers does not matter. Like
most people, physicists think that position and momentum of a particle
have definite values specified by simple numbers. But in the matrix
mechanics of quantum physics, the position of a particle is described by a
matrix -- not a simple number. The main idea of matrix mechanics
proposed by Heisenberg, and developed by Max Born and Pascual Jordan,
is that physical variables, like position q and momentum p of a particle,
are not simple numbers but matrices. These matrices do not follow
commutative law. This means that (p x q) need not be equal to (q x p). In
fact, such modification of Boolean logic calls for a different mode of
understanding necessitated by quantum objects and events.

    In fact, we find similar break down of ordinary logic, and the
consequent illogical statements in mythology and also in Buddhist koans.
The renowned anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss testifies:

       Mythology confronts the student with a situation which at first
       sight could be looked upon as contradictory. On the one hand,
       it would seem that in the course of a myth anything is likely to
       happen. There is no logic, no continuity. Any characteristic
       can be attributed to any subject; every conceivable relation
       can be met. With myth, everything becomes possible.20

     Myths are stories which communicate intuitive truths that cannot be
conveyed through rational discourse. The world of mythical story is a
domain far removed from our present world of space and time. Otherwise,
it would not be a story. Oftentimes, stories begin as follows: “Once upon a
time, in a country . . . .” This style of starting a story shows that events in
the narrative do not take place in our ordinary space and time. Once a
story thus begins, anything can happen in the world described by it. As
Lévi-Strauss has rightly said: “With myth, everything becomes
possible.”21 In fact, many of the concepts of quantum physics, such as
wave-particle, wave function, non-locality, anti-particle and quantum
vacuum, appear as characters in a mythical story. The idea of wave-
particle is similar to that of a round-square which in our common
understanding is an impossibility. Or just imagine the specter of an
electron in doubleslit experiment visiting the Andromeda galaxy before it
lands on the image screen!

     We observe similar break down of the logic of our ordinary language
in Buddhist koans. Zen Buddhists have developed a technique called the
‘koan' which, along with meditation, produces changes in our perceptions
and understanding. Koans employ illogical language in order to achieve a
mode of consciousness different from that of our ordinary mental state.
They are riddles or puzzles that Zen Buddhists use in order to unravel deep
truths about the world and about themselves. “Koans are carefully devised
nonsensical riddles which are meant to make the student of Zen realize the
limitations of logic and reasoning in the most dramatic way. The irrational
wording and paradoxical content of these riddles makes [sic] it impossible
to solve them by thinking.”22 They are designed precisely to stop thought
process and thus to prepare Zen practitioners for non-verbal experience of
reality. The main Taoist scripture, Lao Tzu's Tao Te Ching, is written in an
extremely puzzling, seemingly illogical style. It is full of intriguing
contradictions, and its compact and powerful language is meant to arrest
the Zen practioner's mind and throw it off its familiar tracks of logical
reasoning. In almost all the koans, the striking characteristic is illogical
words or absurd acts. All these koans have unique solutions which a
competent Zen master recognizes immediately. Once the solution is found,
the koan ceases to be paradoxical and becomes a profoundly meaningful
statement made from the state of consciousness which it has helped to
awaken. Zen students are told to think unceasingly about a particular koan
until they come to know its answer. The following are some typical koans.

     To a beginner, the Zen master will normally present one of the two
following koans: “What was your original face — the one you had before
your parents gave birth to you?” Another koan: “You can make the sound
of two hands clapping. Now what is the sound of one hand?”

     When the Zen master Daito saw the emperor Godaigo who was a
student of Zen, the master said: “We were parted many thousands of
kalpas ago, yet we have not been separated even for a moment. We are
facing each other all day long, yet we have never met.”23

     The following are some common examples of koans.

     “The non-activity works! O! work without deeds! What is great has to
be looked for in what is small. What is heavy weighs as long as it is light.”

     “Empty-handed I go, and behold, the spade is in my hand; I walk on
foot, yet on the back of an ox am I riding.

     When I pass over the bridge

     Lo, the water floweth not; it is the bridge that doth flow.”

     All these koans appear illogical and non-sensical puzzles from the
point of our ordinary logic; they break the rules of logic, and involve even
contradictions. But they cease to be illogical when they are solved through
years of meditation achieving another mode of consciousness; they have to
be understood in terms of a new awareness of reality.

     We can make similar remarks about quantum physics. The concepts
and principles of quantum mechanics break the rules of ordinary logic; it
employs a different kind of logic in which logical rules, like distributive
law and commutative law, do not hold. That is the reason why the concepts
of quantum physics appear strange and weird from the point of view of
common sense which follows these rules of logic. Further, quantum theory
employs imposing mathematical frameworks, like Heisenberg's matrix
mechanics and Schrödinger's wave mechanics which are very abstract and
remote from the mathematical structures of Newtonian physics and even
those of the theory of relativity. May we say that a proper understanding of
the strange, bizarre and exotic concepts and principles of quantum theory
requires a mode of comprehension similar to the mode of consciousness
achieved by Zen practitioners employing koans? Do not the mathematical
frameworks of quantum mechanics, such as matrix mechanics and wave
mechanics, constitute a modality of intellectual apprehension
fundamentally different from our ordinary mode of consciousness? It is no
wonder that from the point of view of our common sense (that is, language
and logic, employed in the ‘zone of middle dimensions'), the world of
quantum physics appears strange, bizarre and weird. Polkinghorne rightly
observes: “One of the most important lessons from the story of quantum
theory is the encouragement to be open to the totally unexpected, even to
the initially apparently unintelligible.”24

     We conclude the present volume The Strange World of Quantum
Physics with the personal testimony of the renowned quantum physicist
Heinz R. Pagels about his experience of the strange, exotic quantum world
as he pursued his studies of quantum mechanics: I had no sense of the
‘quantum weirdness' of the atomic world; it was the earlier theory of
special relativity, with its space contractions and time dilations, that
seemed bizarre to me. But as I continued my study my reaction reversed
— relativity seemed less bizarre and more in accord with common sense,
while the quantum theory seemed more and more ‘weird.' Pursuing the
mathematics of the quantum theory, I felt pushed beyond common sense
into unimagined areas. Later, I found out that my experience paralleled
that of the physicists who first discovered the new quantum theory. First
they discovered the mathematical equations of the quantum theory which
worked experimentally; then they pondered the equations and their
meaning for the real world, developing an interpretation which departed
radically from naive realism. As I realized what the abstract mathematics
of quantum theory was actually saying, the world became a very strange
place indeed.25

Truly, quantum physics presents before us a world that is strange, weird
and bizarre - beyond all our wildest imaginations.
                               Notes
                               PROLOGUE

1. Metaphysics is the philosophical discipline which deals with the
    foundational aspects of reality.
2. Nick Herbert, Quantum Reality (New York: Anchor Press, 1985), p.
    119.
3. Lee Smolin, The Trouble with Physics (London: Penguin Books, 2006;
    Allen Lane 2007), p. 7. Italics Smolin's.
4. Pagels, The Cosmic Code (Michael Joseph, 1983; Penguin books,
    1984), p. 57.
5. Incidentally, we note that newspapers and magazines are wont to call
    their lead article ‘cover story.'
6. Mangai, Vidyajyoti Journal of Theological Reflection 78 (Dec. 2014):
    959-60.
7. Pamplany, OMEGA: Indian Journal of Science and Religion 10 (Dec.
    2017): 149-51.
8. Capek, The Philosophical Impact of Contemporary Physics (Princeton,
    New Jersey: D. Van Nostrand Co., 1961).
9. Davies, “The Mind of God,” in Jan Hilgevoord, ed., Physics and Our
    View of the World (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), p.
    237.
10. Wigner, “The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the
    Natural Sciences,” Communications in Pure and Applied Mathematics,
    1.

                       1. TOWARDS QUANTUM PHYSICS

1. Hooker, “The Nature of Quantum Mechanical Reality,” in Robert G.
   Colodny, ed., Paradigms and Paradoxes (University of Pittsburgh
   Press, 1972), p. 72. Italics Hooker's.
2. Bohm, “The Implicate Order: A New Approach to the Nature of
   Reality,” in David L. Schindler, ed., Beyond Mechanism: The Universe
    in Recent Physics and Catholic Thought (Lanham: University Press of
    America, 1986), p. 18.
3. Coveney and Highfield, The Arrow of Time (London: HarperCollins,
    1990; Flamingo edition, 1991), p.108.
4. De Broglie, The Revolution in Physics, trans. Ralph W. Niemeyer (New
    York: The Noonday Press, 1953), p. 21.
5. Peacocke, Theology for a Scientific Age (Oxford: Basil Blackwell,
    1990; second enlarged edition, London: SCM Press, 1993), p. 29.
    Italics Peacocke's.
6. Danah Zohar, The Quantum Self (London: Bloomsbury, 1990), p. 8.
7. Peacocke, Theology for a Scientific Age, p. 29. This is in fact one of the
    fundamental postulates of the philosophy of Immanuel Kant.
8. Ted Peters, “David Bohm, Postmodernism, and the Divine,” Zygon
    (June 1985): 195.
9. It is to be noted that the word ‘atom' in Newtonian mechanics and in
    quantum physics refers to entirely different entities. For Newton, it
    means the ultimate building block of physical reality; it is something
    which occupies space. But in quantum theory, ‘atom' refers to entities
    with a nucleus consisting of protons (and neutrons) and electron
    ‘clouds' around it.
10. Reichenbach, The Rise of Scientific Philosophy (Berkeley: University of
    California Press, 1951; reprint, 1968), p. 183.
11. Hooker, “The Nature of Quantum Mechanical Reality,” p. 70.
12. Ibid., p. 73.
13. Burtt, The Metaphysical Foundations of Modern Physical Science
    (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1924; reprint, 2000), p. 82. Italics
    Burtt's.
14. De Broglie, The Revolution in Physics, p. 100.
15. Capek, Bergson and Modern Physics (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1971), p.
    233.
16. Observer is an idealized person or a piece of equipment that measures
    relevant properties of a physical system.
17. Newton's three laws of motion are the following. 1. Every body
    remains in its state of rest or of uniform motion in a straight line unless
    it is acted upon by an external force. This is called the law of inertia. 2.
    The change of motion is proportional to the force impressed, and takes
    place in the direction of force. 3. To every action, there is an equal and
    opposite reaction.
18. Prigogine and Stengers, Order out of Chaos (Bantam Books, 1984;
    Fontana Paperbacks, 1985), p. 225. Italics the authors'.
19. Cf. Kip S. Thorne, Black Holes and Time Warps: Einstein's Legacy
    (New York: W. W. Norton & Co., 1994; London: Macmillan,
    Papermac edition, 1995), pp. 62-63. Errol E. Harris, The Restitution of
    Metaphysics (New York: Humanity Books, 2000), p. 97. David Bohm,
    Causality and Chance in Modern Physics (London: Routledge &
    Kegan Paul, 1957; reprint, 1984), pp. 35-36. John P. Briggs and F.
    Davies Peat, Looking Glass Universe (Simon & Schuster, 1984;
    Fontana Paperbacks, 1985), pp. 39-40. Fritjof Capra, The Turning
    Point (Simon & Schuster 1982; Fontana Paperbacks, The Flamingo
    edition, 1983; reprint, 1984), p. 51.
20. Milic Capek, The New Aspects of Time (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
    Publishers, 1991), p. 197.
21. Greene, The Elegant Universe (London: Jonathan Cape, 1999; Vintage
    edition, 2000), p. 386. We have taken this as the opening quote of the
    present book.
22. De Broglie, The Revolution in Physics, p. 14.
23. Schilling, The New Consciousness in Science and Religion (London:
    SCM Press, 1973), p. 81.
24. Arthur Peacocke, Creation and the World of Science (Oxford: Oxford
    University Press, 1979; reprint, 2004), pp. 55-56. Italics Peacocke's.
25. De Broglie, The Revolution in Physics, p. 219.
26. Referred in R. Blanché, Contemporary Science and Rationalism, trans.
    I. A. G. Le Bek (Edinburgh: Oliver & Boyd, 1968), p. 32.
27. Smolin, The Life of the Cosmos (London: The Orion Publishing Group,
    1997; Hyderabad: Universities Press, 1999), p. 304.
28. De Broglie, The Revolution in Physics, p. 102. We will deal with
    uncertainty principle in 2.3.1.
29. Smolin, The Life of the Cosmos, p. 305.
30. Davies, “What Caused the Big Bang?” in John Leslie, ed., Physical
    Cosmology and Philosophy (New York: Macmillan Co., 1990), p. 236.
31. Davies, Superforce (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1984; Penguin
    Books, 1995), p. 200. Davies here refers to the Newtonian,
    deterministic concept of causality as proposed by Pierre Simon
    Laplace, the French mathematician.
32. Reyna, The Philosophy of Matter in the Atomic Era (Bombay: Asia
    Publishing House, 1962), p. 160.
33. Paul Davies, “A Naturalistic Account of the Universe,” in Michael
    Peterson, William Hasker et el., eds., Philosophy of Religion (New
    York: Oxford University Press, 1996), p. 221.
34. Schlegel, “The Impossible Spectator,” (the 6 th Centennial Review
    Lecture at Michigan State University, 12 th May 1975), The Centennial
    Review, pp. 218, 230, quoted in Peacocke, Creation and the World of
    Science, p. 56. Ellipses Peacocke's.
35. Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 58.
36. Ibid., p. 132.
37. We have devoted one full chapter (chapter five) in order to examine
    these two modes of relation of the observer and the observed quantum
    object.
38. Cf. Blanché, Contemporary Science and Rationalism, pp. 31-33, 38.
    Bohm, “The Implicate Order,” pp. 18-21. Peter Coles, ed., The Icon
    Critical Dictionary of the New Cosmology, p. 300.
39. Pagels, The Cosmic Code, pp. 124-25. Ellipsis mine. The Copenhagen
    interpretation is a formulation of quantum mechanics principally
    attributed to Niels Bohr (from Copenhagen) and Werner Heisenberg.
40. Peacocke, Creation and the World of Science, p. 57. Here Peacocke
    refers to the rigorous determinism advocated by Pierre-Simon Laplace.
    For a statement of Laplace's position, see, 4.4.3.
41. Incidentally, the theory of relativity also had its origin in Einstein's
    investigation of the phenomenon of light. Michelson-Morley
    experiment proved that the velocity of light is constant at 186,000 miles
    (300,000 km) per second. Einstein made the constancy of the velocity
    of light one of the fundamental postulates of his theory of relativity.
42. Radiation is the energy carried by waves or particles.
43. We will deal with Planck's discovery in detail in 2.1.2.
44. For an explanation of ‘continuum,' see 2.1.1.
45. We will deal with the Copenhagen interpretation in detail in 2.5.2.1.
46. Prigogine and Isabelle Stengers, Order out of Chaos, p. 220.
47. https://www.einstein-online.info/en/spotlight/path_integrals/#:~:tex-
    t=The%20resulting%20sum%20tells%20us,integral%20or%20sum%20
    over%20histories. Accessed on 5 th Sept. 2020. Figure is modified.
48. Greene, The Elegant Universe, p. 111.
49. Cf. Greene, The Elegant Universe, pp. 109-112. Coveney and
    Highfield, The Arrow of Time, p. 124.
    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Path_inte-gral_formulation.
    https://www.google.com/search?q=feymann%27s+-
    sum+over+paths&oq=feymann%27s+sum+over+paths&aqs=-
    chrome..69i57.13060j0j7&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8
50. The Holy Grail is a treasure that serves as an important motif in
    Arthurian literature. (It is the body of stories centering on the legendary
    king Arthur). Different traditions describe it as a cup, dish or stone
    with miraculous powers that provide happiness and eternal sustenance
    in infinite abundance. The term ‘holy grail' is often used to denote an
    elusive object or goal that is sought after for its great significance. In
    the present context, such a goal is the Theory of Everything. See 4.4.3.
    Cf. Pagels, The Cosmic Code, pp. 22-27, 60-92. Greene, The Elegant
    Universe, pp. 92-108. Gary Zukav, The Dancing Wu Li Masters (New
    York: William Morrow & Co., 1979; New York: Bantam Books,
    1980), pp. 48-53, 94-99. N. C. Panda, Maya in Physics (Delhi: Motilal
    Banarsidass, 1991; reprint, 1999), pp. 74 ff. Glen Peter Kezwer,
    Meditation, Oneness and Physics (New Delhi: Sterling paperback,
    1995), pp. 118-29.
51. The Planck time of 10 -43 sec is the time it takes light to ‘cross' the
    Planck length of 10 -33 cm which is some 10 -20 times the distance ‘across'
    a proton. The Planck length is one millionth of a billionth of a billionth
    of a billionth of a centimetre; or 100 billion billion times less than the
    size of an electron. To get a sense of this scale, if we were to magnify
    an atom to the size of the known universe, the Planck length would
    barely be the height of an average tree. Below this magnitude, quantum
    fluctuations in the fabric of space-time would become enormous.
52. Cf. Heinz R. Pagels, Perfect Symmetry (London: Simon & Schuster,
    1985; London: Bantam Books, 1986), p. 186. Paul Davies and John
    Gribbin, The Matter Myth: Beyond Chaos and Complexity (Viking,
    1991; Penguin Books, 1992), p. 235.
53. Feynman, The Character of Physical law (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
    Press, 1965), p. 129, quoted in Greene, The Elegant Universe, pp.
    8687. Incidentally, Hawking refers to a similar story attributed to
    Arthur Eddington: “There is a story that a journalist told Eddington in
    the early 1920s that he had heard there were only three people in the
    world who understood general relativity. Eddington replied, ‘I am
    trying to think who the third person is.'” [The Theory of Everything
    (Beverly Hills: Phoenix books; Mumbai: Jaico Publishing House,
    2006; reprint, 2009), p. 37.]
54. Greene, The Elegant Universe, p. 87.

                     2. AN OVERVIEW OF QUANTUM PHYSICS

1.  Zukav, The Dancing Wu Li Masters, p. 149.
2.  Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 22.
3.  Bohm, “The Implicate Order,” p. 21.
4.  Initial conditions are the data that describe the starting state of a
    physical system.
5. Davies, The Edge of Infinity (London: J. M. Dent & Sons, 1981;
    Penguin books, 1994), p. xiv.
6. Quoted in Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 150. No reference to Einstein
    is given.
7. David Bohm, Wholeness and Implicate Order (London: Routledge &
    Kegan Paul, 1980; reprint, 1982), p. 176.
8. Hawking, The Theory of Everything, p. 26. For a short explanation of
    Big Bang singularity and Planck dimensions, see 3.3.1.1 and 6.1.1.
9. John Boslough, Stephen Hawking's Universe (New York: Avon
    Books, 1989), p. 87.
10. R. Blanché, Contemporary Science and Rationalism, p. 31.
11. Lucas, Space, Time and Causality (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
    1984), p. 184.
12. Cf. Bohm, “The Implicate Order,” p. 21. Zukav, The Dancing Wu Li
    Masters, p. 48. ‘Quantum' is a Latin word which means ‘how much?'
    It refers to a quantity of something, a specific amount. ‘Quantum' in
      the present context means the smallest possible amount of energy, the
      unit of a discrete quantity of energy. ‘Quanta' is its plural.
13.   Bohm, “The Implicate Order,” p. 18-19.
14.   De Broglie, The Revolution in Physics, p. 109.
15.   Blanché, Contemporary Science and Rationalism, p. 31.
16.   Ibid., pp. 32-33.
17.   Jeans, Physics and Philosophy (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
      Press; reprint, 1958), p. 127.
18.   John Gribbin, The Omega Point (London: Bantam Books, 1988), p.
      226.
19.   See 3.3.1.2.
20.   For the concept of determinism, see 2.3.2, and for locality 2.5.3.1.
21.   Bohm, “The Implicate Order,” p. 21. Italics Bohm's. The reader may
      note many references to continuum and discreteness in the present
      book, especially in the third chapter.
22.   Hooker, “The nature of Quantum Mechanical Reality,” p. 162. Italics
      Hooker's. Ellipsis mine.
23.   See 1.2.1.
24.   We hasten to add that even after Planck's discovery of the quantum,
      Einstein firmly held on to the concept of continuum in his theory of
      relativity.
25.   De Broglie, The Revolution in Physics, p. 108.
26.   Zukav, The Dancing Wu Li Masters, p. 50. No material object has
      been found to absorb all incoming radiation, but carbon in its graphite
      form absorbs all but about 3% of radiation.
27.   Kezwer, Meditation, Oneness and Physics, pp. 115-20.
28.   De Broglie, The Revolution in Physics, p. 108.
29.   Think of the radiation of mobile phone, which has short wavelength.
      It is energetic, and its longer use can damage organic tissues of our
      body.
30.   De Broglie, The Revolution in Physics, p. 106.
31.   Here the words ‘larger' and ‘smaller' should not be taken in the
      quantitative sense. In order to indicate this fact, they are placed
      between inverted commas.
32.   Zukav, The Dancing Wu Li Masters, pp. 51-52.
33. Theoretically everything has a wavelength — baseballs, automobiles
    and even human beings; their wavelengths are so small that they are
    not noticeable.
34. Greene, The Elegant Universe, pp. 89-91.
35. Note that the Latin word ‘pulvis' means ‘dust.'
36. Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 23. Ellipsis mine.
37. Greene, The Elegant Universe, pp. 97-98.
38. An experiment with one slit (left or right) open can be called a
    ‘single-slit experiment.'
39. Greene, The Elegant Universe, p. 98.
40. Double-slit experiments primarily employ photons and electrons.
    Photons are generated by any means which produces light like
    flashlights. Electrons can be produced by an electron gun. Electron
    guns are devices that generate streams of electrons, and they are quite
    common. For example, our television sets have electron guns at their
    back, and television images are produced by guiding the electrons
    generated by this gun to appropriate locations on the screen.
41. Consider for example, waves produced in a pond when two stones are
    dropped in it at the same time. If two wave peaks overlap, the height
    of water wave at that point increases; it is the sum of the heights of the
    two individual peaks. But if a wave peak overlaps with a wave trough
    from the other, they cancel each other out.
42. Greene, The Elegant Universe, p. 102. Italics Greene's.
43. Zukav, The Dancing Wu Li Masters, pp. 62-63. Italics Zukav's.
44. Hawking, A Brief History of Time (London: Bantam Press edition,
    1988; Bantam edition, 1989), p. 63. Italics Hawking's.
45. John C. Polkinghorne, Reason and Reality (London: SPCK, 1991), p.
    87.
46. Greene, The Elegant Universe, pp. 101-102. Italics Greene's.
47. Cf. John Gribbin, Companion to the Cosmos (London: The Orion
    Publishing Group, 1996; Hyderabad: Universities Press, 1999), pp.
    39496. Davies and Gribbin The Matter Myth, p. 205. Greene, The
    Elegant Universe, pp. 97-104.
48. Greene, The Elegant Universe, p. 110. Cf. Davies and Gribbin, The
    Matter Myth, pp. 202-206.
49. Gribbin, Companion to the Cosmos, p. 396.
50. Capra, The Tao of Physics (Boston, Mass.: Shambhala Publications,
    1976; Bantam revised edition, 1984), p. 56.
51. Pagels, The Cosmic Code, pp. 130-31. Italics Pagels'.
52. Ibid., p. 126. Italics Pagels.
53. Ibid., p. 128.
54. Greene, The Elegant Universe, p. 105. Italics Greene's.
55. Coveney and Highfield, The Arrow of Time, p. 124.
56. Kezwer, Meditation, Oneness and Physics, p. 119.
57. Zukav, The Dancing Wu Li Masters, p. 53. Italics Zukav's. Ellipsis
    mine. Normal sources of light, like an electric bulb or a star, produce
    billions and billions of photons in a steady stream. Because there are
    so many photons, and each is so small, light appears continuous to us,
    just as the stream of individual molecules of water appears
    continuous.
58. Greene, The Elegant Universe, p. 101.
59. Incidentally, Einstein was awarded Nobel Prize for physics in 1921
    for this discovery, and not for his celebrated theory of relativity.
60. De Broglie, The Revolution in Physics, p. 112.
61. Greene, The Elegant Universe, p. 94.
62. Lenard won Nobel Prize for his work in 1905.
63. Greene, The Elegant Universe, p. 95. Italics Greene's. See also
    Kezwer, Meditation, Oneness and Physics, p. 120.
64. De Broglie, The Revolution in Physics, p. 112.
65. Zukav, The Dancing Wu Li Masters, p. 54.
66. See 2.1.2.
67. We will get a sense of the scale of these particles of light if we
    consider that a typical one-hundred-watt bulb emits about hundred
    billion billion (10 20) photons per second.
68. Greene, The Elegant Universe, p. 97. Italics Greene's.
69. Kezwer, Meditation, Oneness and Physics, p. 120. Cf. Zukav, The
    Dancing Wu Li Masters, pp. 53-54, 94-97. Greene, The Elegant
    Universe, pp. 93-96.
    https://science.jrank.org/pages/5168/Photoelectric-Effect-Einstein-
    photoelectric-theory.html accessed on 16th April 2020.
      In the case of electromagnetic waves in the visible part of the
      spectrum, an increase in frequency corresponds to a change in colour
      from red to orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo and finally to violet.
      Frequencies higher than that of violet light are not visible and
      correspond to ultraviolet radiation, such as X rays; and frequencies
      lower than that of red are also not visible, and correspond to infrared
      radiation.
70.   Greene, The Elegant Universe, p. 103. Italics Greene's.
71.   Peter Kosso, Appearance and Reality (Oxford: Oxford University
      Press, 1998), p. 124.
72.   Kezwer, Meditation, Oneness and Physics, p. 127. Richard Dewitt,
      World Views (Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2004), p. 237.
      Some general observations about the nature of particles and waves are
      in place. There are two ways in which energy and information can be
      sent from one place to another, namely, by waves and particles. In the
      case of a particle-signal, physical bits of material stuff actually move
      from one place to other. But a wave-signal travels without any object
      moving from the source to the destination. A wave is a pattern of
      disturbance in the intervening medium. For example, two people, A
      and B, hold opposite ends of a tight string, and they move it up and
      down. In this way, they can send signals. Bits of string do not travel
      from A to B. In fact, none even moves in B's direction, but A
      communicates a disturbance created by him/her in the string in the
      shape of a wave. The moving shape is the wave, and the string is the
      medium. Waves can take on all sorts of shapes. They can be produced
      as a single, sharp pulse, a slow, broad pulse, a series of pulses at a
      certain frequency, and so on. [Kosso, Appearance and Reality, p.
      116.]
73.   Hooker, “The Nature of Quantum Mechanical Reality,” p. 73.
      Interference is the phenomenon in which two or more waves of the
      same frequency combine to reinforce or cancel each other. Diffraction
      is the bending of a wave around an obstacle. Interference and
      diffraction occur in all kinds of waves - ocean waves, sound waves
      and electromagnetic waves like light.
74.   De Broglie, The Revolution in Physics, p. 18.
75.   Bohr, “Discussions with Einstein on Epistemological Problems in
      Atomic Physics,” in Paul A. Schilpp, ed., Albert Einstein:
      Philosopher-Scientist (Evanston, Ill.: 1949), p. 210, quoted in Ernest
      Nagel, The Structure of Science (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul,
      1961; Harcourt, Brace & World, Fourth impression, 1974), p. 302.
      Italics Nagel's.
76.   Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 132.
77.   Davies, The Cosmic Blueprint (London: William Heinemann, 1987;
      Penguin books, 1989), p. 167. Italics Davies'.
78.   Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 86.
79.   Cf. Morris Kline, Mathematics and the Search for Knowledge (New
      York: Oxford University Press, 1985; paperback edition, 1986), p.
      194.
80.   Cf. Nagel, The Structure of Science, pp. 302-303. Kezwer,
      Meditation, Oneness and Physics, pp. 127-28. Dewitt, World Views,
      pp. 236-37. Kos-so, Appearance and Reality, pp. 116, 124.
81.   https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave - particle_duality
82.   John F. Hawley and Katherine A. Holocomb, Foundations of Modern
      Cosmology (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005), p. 505.
83.   De Broglie, The Revolution in Physics, pp. 212-13.
84.   Seth Lloyd, Programming the Universe (London: Vintage Books,
      2007), p. 111. Italics Lloyd's.
85.   De Broglie, The Revolution in Physics, pp. 16-17. Ellipsis mine.
86.   Heisenberg, The Principles of the Quantum Theory (Chicago: 1930),
      p. 3.
87.   Davies and Gribbin, The Matter Myth, pp. 213-14.
88.   Eddington, The Nature of the Physical World (Ann Arbor: The
      University of Michigan Press, 1968), p. 224, quoted in Augustine
      Pamplany and Job Kozhamthadam, East-West Interface of Reality
      (Aluva: ISR Publications, 2003), p. 47.
89.   Cf. Greene, The Elegant Universe, 113. Pamplany and
      Kozhamthadam, East-West Interface of Reality, p. 127.
90.   Davies, The Cosmic Blueprint, p. 166. Italics Davies'.
91.   Gribbin, The Omega Point, p. 24. Italics Gribbin's.
92.   Davies, The Goldilocks Enigma (London: Allen Lane, 2006), p. 73.
93.   Greene, The Elegant Universe, p. 115.
94. Pagels, The Cosmic Code, pp. 82-83. Cf. Davies and Gribbin, The
     Matter Myth, pp. 26-27, 213-14. Bohm, Causality and Chance in
     Modern Physics, pp. 35-36, 83-84. Greene, The Elegant Universe,
     pp. 113-15. Briggs and Peat, Looking Glass Universe, pp. 50-52.
95. Greene, The Elegant Universe, p. 116.
96. Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 83. Italics Pagels'.
97. De Broglie, The Revolution in Physics, p. 212. The capitalization of
     the first two words in the quote is found in de Broglie's text. We have
     dealt with the problem of determinism and indeterminism earlier in
     2.3.2.
98. Gal-Or, Cosmology, Physics, and Philosophy (New York:
     SpringerVerlag, 1981), p. 245.
99. Prigogine and Stengers, Order out of Chaos, pp. 226-27.
100. De Broglie, The Revolution in Physics, p. 17. Ellipsis mine.
101. Davies, The Cosmic Blueprint, p. 166. Italics Davies'.
102. De Broglie, The Revolution in Physics, pp. 102-103. Ellipsis mine.
103. Prigogine and Stengers, Order out of Chaos, p. 226.
104. Davies, The Cosmic Blueprint, pp. 166-67. Italics Davies'. For the
     explanation of the concept of wave function, see 2.4.1.
105. Hawking, A Brief History of Time, p. 183.
106. Davies and Gribbin, The Matter Myth, p. 27.
107. Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 76.
108. Ibid., p. 79.
109. Born, Atomic Physics (London: 1935), p. 90.
110. Eddington, The Nature of Physical World, p. 309.
111. Bohm, Causality and Chance in Modern Physics, p. 83.
112. Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 76.
113. Cf. Bohm, Causality and Chance in Modern Physics, pp. 35, 84.
     Pagels, The Cosmic Code, pp. 76, 83-84.
114. De Broglie, The Revolution in Physics, pp. 216-17.
115. Zukav, The Dancing Wu Li Masters, p. 80.
116. Prigogine and Stengers, Order out of Chaos, p. 226.
117. Polkinghorne, Reason and Reality, p. 87.
118. Zukav, The Dancing Wu Li Masters, p. 81. Italics Zukav's.
119. Barbour, The End of Time (London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1999;
     Phoenix paperbacks, 2000; third impression 2003), p. 203.
120. The word ‘isolated' in the present context refers to the quantum
     system before a measurement is made.
121. https://www.britannica.com/science/wave-function, accessed on 21st
     July 2021.
122. Zukav, The Dancing Wu Li Masters, p. 258.
123. Coveney and Highfield, The Arrow of Time, p. 119. Italics the
     authors'.
124. Zukav, The Dancing Wu Li Masters, pp. 257-58.
125. Davies, The Cosmic Blueprint, p. 165.
126. Ibid., p. 166. Italics Davies'.
127. Bohm, Wholeness and Implicate Order, p. 137. Italics Bohm's.
128. Ibid., p. 129. Italics Bohm's.
129. Ibid., pp. 128-29. Italics Bohm's.
130. Cf. Zukav, The Dancing Wu Li Masters, pp. 73-74, 257-58. Greene,
     The Elegant Universe, pp. 106-107.
131. Davies, The Cosmic Blueprint, p. 169.
132. Coveney and Highfield, The Arrow of Time, p. 129.
133. Zukav, The Dancing Wu Li Masters, pp. 72-73.
134. Barbour, The End of Time, p. 203.
135. Zukav, The Dancing Wu Li Masters, p. 258.
136. Coveney and Highfield, The Arrow of Time, p. 129.
137. Barbour, The End of Time, p. 204.
138. Coveney and Highfield, The Arrow of Time, p. 135. Italics the
     authors'. Ellipsis mine.
139. Ervin Schrödinger, “Die Gegenwaetige Situation in
     Quantenmechanik,” in Die Naturwissenschaften 23, 807-812, 824-28,
     844-49 (1935), quoted in Max Jammar, The Philosophy of Quantum
     Mechanics (John Wiley & Sons, 1974), p. 217.
140. Davies and Gribbin, The Matter Myth, p. 212. Italics the authors'.
141. Ibid., p. 210.
142. Polkinghorne, Reason and Reality, p. 89.
143. Barbour, The End of time, p. 224.
144. De Witt and N. Graham, eds., The Many Worlds Interpretation of
     Quantum Mechanics (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1973),
     quoted in Coveney and Highfield, The Arrow of Time, p. 133. Ellipsis
     the authors'.
145. John Gribbin and Martin Rees, Cosmic Coincidences (London:
     William Heinemann, 1990; Black Swan edition, 1992), p. 275. Cf.
     Davies and Gribbin, The Matter Myth, pp. 208-211. Zukav, The
     Dancing Wu Li Masters, pp. 75-77, 81, 257. Kezwer, Meditation,
     Oneness and Physics, pp. 130-32. Panda, Maya in Physics, p. 105.
146. Polkinghorne, One World (London: SPCK, 1986), p. 47.
147. Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 70.
148. Herbert, Quantum Reality (New York: Anchor Press, 1987), p. 15.
149. Bohm, Causality and Chance in Modern Physics, p. 92.
150. Blanché, Contemporary Science and Rationalism, p. 39.
151. John C. Polkinghorne, The Quantum World (London: Longman,
     1984; Pelican books reprint, 1987), p. 3.
152. Greene, The Elegant Universe, pp. 87-88. Italics Greene's.
153. Marx W. Wartofsky, Conceptual Foundations of Scientific Thought
     (London: Collier-Macmillan, 1968), p. 340.
154. Penrose, The Emperor's New Mind (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
     1989), p. 268. Italics Penrose'.
155. Polkinghorne, The Quantum World, p. 81.
156. Polkinghorne, Reason and Reality, pp. 88-89.
157. Cf. Bohm, Causality and Chance in Modern Physics, pp. 91-92.
     Polkinghorne, Reason and Reality, pp. 96-97. Smolin, The Trouble
     with Physics, pp. 6-7. Robert John Russell, “Quantum Physics in
     Philosophical and Theological Perspective,” in Robert John Russell,
     William R. Stoeger and George V. Coyne, eds., Physics, Philosophy,
     and Theology: A Common Quest for Understanding (Vatican City
     State: Vatican Observatory Publications, 1988), pp. 346, 354.
158. Niels Bohr, “On the Notion of Causality and Complementarity,”
     Dialectica 2 (1948), p. 317, quoted in Pamplany and Kozhamthadam,
     East-West Interface of Reality, p. 51.
159. Quoted in Jammar, The Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics, p. 58.
160. Quoted in Richard Morris, The Nature of Reality (New York:
     Noonday Press, 1987), p. 222.
161. Heisenberg, Physics and Philosophy (New York: Harper & Row,
     1958), p. 58.
162. Quoted in Herbert, Quantum Reality, p. 18.
163. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, trans. J.M.D. Meiklejohn (London:
     Dent, Everyman Library 1934; reprint, 1974).
164. Philipse, Heidegger's Philosophy of Being (Princeton: Princeton
     University Press, 1998; Delhi: Motilal Barsidass, 1999), p. 129.
165. Davies and Gribbin, The Matter Myth, p. 21. Italics the authors'.
     Ellipsis mine.
166. See Philipse' statement, note no. 164.
167. See note no. 158.
168. Lavine, From Socrates to Sartre: the Philosophical Quest (New York:
     Bantam Books, 1984; reprint, 1989), p. 197.
169. K. Babu Joseph, “The Nature of Knowledge of the Physical World: A
     Mathematical-Logical Perspective,” Omega 20 (June 2021): 76.
170. Stapp, “Mind, Matter, and Quantum Mechanics,” unpublished paper,
     quoted in Zukav, The Dancing Wu Li Masters, p. 82. Italics Zukav's.
171. Zukav, The Dancing Wu Li Masters, p. 82.
172. Quoted in Herbert, Quantum Reality, p. 17.
173. Bell, Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics (collected
     papers), (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987), quoted in
     Chris J. Isham, “Quantum Theories of the Creation of the Universe,”
     in Robert John Russell, Nancey Murphy and C. J. Isham, eds.,
     Quantum Cosmology and the Laws of Nature (Vatican City: Vatican
     Observatory Publications, 1993; second edition, 1996), p. 86.
174. Einstein's statement as reported in Ronald W. Clark, Einstein: The Life
     and Times, quoted in Kline, Mathematics and the Search for
     Knowledge, p. 242. Einstein used to refer to God as the ‘Old One.'
175. Schilpp, ed., Albert Einstein, Philosopher-Scientist, p. 176.
176. Quoted in Kline, Mathematics and the Search for Knowledge, p. 242.
     No reference to Einstein is given. Ellipsis Kline's.
177. Quoted in Kline, Mathematics and the Search for Knowledge, p. 242.
     No reference to Dirac is given. Ellipsis found in Kline.
178. Quoted in Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 149. Ellipsis Pagels'. No
     reference to Einstein is given.
179. Einstein in a paper of 1935, quoted in Kline, Mathematics and the
     Search for Knowledge, p. 190. No reference to Einstein is given.
180. The position presented in the EPR paper is alternately called ‘EPR
     experiment' or ‘EPR paradox.' It is actually a thought experiment
     which involves a paradox.
181. Davies, The Cosmic Blueprint, p. 176.
182. Barbour, The End of Time, p. 215.
183. Ibid., p. 217. Cf. Pagels, The Cosmic Code, pp. 54-55,124-25,149-
     52. Rudy Rucker, The Fourth Dimension (Boston: Houghton &
     Mifflin, 1984), p. 186. Briggs and Peat, Looking Glass Universe, pp.
     74-76. Capra, The Tao of Physics, pp. 301-303. Coveney and
     Highfield, The Arrow of Time, pp. 125, 127.
184. Coveney and Highfield, The Arrow of Time, p. 136.
185. Albert Einstein, Boris Podolsky and Nathan Rosen, “Can
     QuantumMechanical Description of Reality be Considered
     Complete?” Physical Review 47, 777 (1935), quoted in Kezwer,
     Meditation, Oneness and Physics, p. 161.
186. Davies, The Cosmic Blueprint, p. 177.
187. Keven J. Sharpe, “Relating the Physics and Religion of David Bohm,”
     Zygon 25 (March 1990): 107.
188. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Action_at_a_distance, accessed on 22nd
     April 2020.
189. Kafatos and Nadeau, The Conscious Universe: Part and Whole in
     Modern Physical Theory (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1990), p. 1.
190. Coveney and Highfield, The Arrow of Time, p. 135.
191. Polkinghorne, Reason and Reality, p. 43.
192. Russell, “Quantum Physics in Philosophical and Theological
     Perspective,” p. 348.
193. Herbert, Quantum Reality, pp. 213-15.
194. Bohm, “The Implicate Order,” p. 19. Italics Bohm's. Ellipsis mine.
195. Paul Davies, The Mind of God: The Scientific Basis for a Rational
     World (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1992), p. 158.
196. John D. Barrow, Theories of Everything: The Quest for Ultimate
     Explanation (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990; Vintage edition,
     1992), pp. 194-95.
197. David Bohm and Basil Hiley, “Einstein and Non-locality in Quantum
     Theory,” in Maurice Goldsmith, Allen Mackay and James
     Woudhuysen, eds., Einstein: the First Hundred Years (Oxford:
     Pergamon Press, 1980), p. 51.
198. Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 150.
199. Barbour, The End of Time, p. 221.
200. Davies, The Cosmic Blueprint, p. 177.
201. Polkinghorne, Reason and Reality, pp. 94-95.
202. John D. Barrow, The World within the World (Oxford: Clarendon
     Press, 1988), p. 147.
203. Ibid. Italics Barrow's.
204. We can render the postulate more complex by proposing the limit as
     five heads and five tails in a row; and we can also make tossing more
     complex by suggesting a very extra-ordinary instance of ten heads
     and ten tails in a row.
205. Briggs and Peat, Looking Glass Universe, pp. 92-93.
206. Ibid., p. 92. Italics the authors'. Cf. Sharpe, “Relating the Physics and
     Religion of David Bohm,” pp. 107-109. Herbert, Quantum Reality,
     pp. 212-15. Bohm, Wholeness and Implicate Order, pp. 62-69.
     Davies, Superforce, p. 220. Polkinghorne, Reason and Reality, pp.
     94-95. Capra, The Tao of Physics, pp. 123, 194-95. Kezwer,
     Meditation, Oneness and Physics, p. 152.
207. It is to be noted here that the authors quoted in the present subsection
     do not make the distinction between ‘non-locality' and ‘entanglement,'
     but use these terms interchangeably.
208. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_entanglement#:~:text=Quan-
     tum%20 entanglement%20is%20a%20physical,are%20separat-
     ed%20by%20a%20large
209. Erwin Schrödinger, “Discussions of Probability Relations between
     Separated Systems,” Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical
     Society 31, 555 (1935), quoted in Kezwer, Meditation, Oneness and
     Physics, p. 178. Ellipsis found in Keswer.
210. Herbert, Quantum Reality, p. 245. Italics Herbert's. Note that Herbert
     uses the term ‘non-locality' rather than ‘entanglement.' That does not
     make any difference in the present context.
211. Keswer, Meditation, Oneness and Physics, p.178. No reference to
     Schrödinger is given. Capitalization of the first word found in
     Keswer.
212. Capra, The Tao of Physics, p. 300.
213. Smolin, The Life of the Cosmos, p. 314.
214. Ibid., p. 310. Italics Smolin's.
215. Polkinghorne, The Quantum World, pp. 79-80.
216. Kafatos and Nadeau, The Conscious Universe, p. 113.
217. Herbert, Quantum Reality, pp. 18-19, quoted in Augustine Pamplany,
     Theological Mysteries in Scientific Perspective (Bangalore: Asian
     Trading Corporation, 2005), p. 135. Ellipsis found in Pamplany.
218. Heisenberg, Physics and Philosophy, p. 107, quoted in Capra, The
     Tao of Physics, p. 125.
219. Zukav, The Dancing Wu Li Masters, p. 282.
220. Stapp, “S-Matrix Interpretation of Quantum Theory,” Physical
     Review, Vol. D3 (March 1971): 1310, quoted in Capra, The Tao of
     Physics, p. 125.
221. Davies and Gribbin, The Matter Myth, pp. 217-18.
222. Kafatos and Nadeau, The Conscious Universe, pp. 112-13.
223. Capra, The Tao of Physics, p. 301.
224. Niels Bohr, Atomic Physics and Human Knowledge (New York: John
     Wiley & Sons, 1958), p. 57, quoted in Capra, The Tao of Physics, p.
     124.
225. David Bohm & Basil Hiley, “On the Intuitive Understanding of
     Nonlocality as Implied by Quantum Theory,” Foundations of Physics
     5 (1975): 96, quoted in Capra, The Tao of Physics, p.124.
226. Kafatos and Nadeau, The Conscious Universe, pp. 113.
227. Bohm & Hiley, “On the Intuitive Understanding of Nonlocality as
     Implied by Quantum Theory,” pp. 96,102, quoted in Capra, The Tao
     of Physics, p. 124. Ellipsis found in Capra.
228. Kafatos and Nadeau, The Conscious Universe, p. 121. Ellipsis mine.
229. Ibid.
230. Smolin, The Life of the Cosmos, p. 314.
231. Kafatos and Nadeau, The Conscious Universe, p. 1. Cf. Davies and
     Gribbin. The Matter Myth, p. 217. Capra, The Tao of Physics, pp.
     123-24, 300-303. Smolin, The Life of the Cosmos, p. 314. Barrow,
     Theories of Everything, p. 195.
     https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_
     entanglement#:~:text=Quantum%20entanglement%20is%20a%20
     physical,are%20separated%20by%20a%20large
232. Duane H. Larson, Times of the Trinity: A Proposal for Theistic
     Cosmology (New York: Peter Lang, 1995), p. 8.
233. See 2.4.1.
234. Larson, Times of the Trinity, p. 83.
235. See 2.4.2.
236. Bohm, Wholeness and the Implicate Order, pp. 128-29. Italics
     Bohm's.
237. Zukav, The Dancing Wu Li Masters, p. 258.
238. Polkinghorne, Reason and Reality, p. 97.
239. Quoted in Polkinghorne, The Quantum World, p. 81.
240. Quoted in Russell, “Quantum Physics in Philosophical and
     Theological Perspective,” p. 349.
241. Larson, Times of the Trinity, p. 81.
242. Polkinghorne, Science and theology: An Introduction (Trowbridge,
     UK: The Cromwell Press 1998), p.310.
243. Quoted in Ian G. Barbour, Religion and Science (London: SCM
     Press, 1998), p. 173. No reference to Heisenberg is given. Italics
     Barbour's.
244. Heisenberg, Physics and Philosophy, p. 41.
245. Bohm, Wholeness and Implicate Order, p. 129.
246. Polkinghorne, Reason and Reality, p. 88.
247. Capra, The Tao of Physics, p. 56. Ellipsis mine.
248. William James, “The Dilemma of Determinism,” The Will to Believe
     and Other Essays in Popular Philosophy (London: Longmans Green,
     1917), pp. 150-51, quoted in Capek, The Philosophical Impact of
     Contemporary Physics, pp. 335-36. Italics Capek's. Ellipsis mine.

                      3. THE QUANTUM FIELD THEORIES
1.    For a summary of the theory of relativity, see Joseph Mathew, In
      Search of Cosmic Origins: The Great Saga of the Universe
      (Bangalore: Asian Trading Corporation, 2014), pp. 29-39.
2.    Quoted in Pagels, Perfect Symmetry, p. 174. No reference to
      Weinberg is given. Ellipsis Pagels'.
3.    Greene, The Elegant Universe, p. 129.
4.    Ibid., p. 130.
5.    Pagels, Perfect Symmetry, p. 317.
6.    Hawking, A Brief History of Time, p. 12.
7.    Smolin, The Trouble with Physics, p. 55.
8.    See 3.3.
9.    Cf. Smolin, The Trouble with Physics, pp. 12-13. F. David Peat,
      Superstrings and the Search for the Theory of Everything
      (Contemporary Books, 1988; London: Abacus reprint, 1992), pp. 17-
      18. Capra, The Tao of Physics, pp. 194, 196, 304.
10.   Smolin, The Life of the Cosmos, p. 63.
11.   Rupert Sheldrake, The Presence of the Past (New York: Time Books,
      Random House, 1988), p. 97.
12.   Harris, The Restitution of Metaphysics, pp. 98-99.
13.   Errol E. Harris, The Foundations of Metaphysics in Science (London:
      George Allen & Unwin, 1965; London: Humanities paperback,
      1993), p. 52.
14.   Capra, The Tao of Physics, p. 194.
15.   Ibid., pp. 194-95. Italics Capra's.
16.   Munitz, Space, Time and Creation (New York: Collier Books, 1961),
      pp. 99-100. Italics Munitz'.
17.   David Bohm, Unfolding Meaning (London: Routledge, 1985; Ark
      paperbacks reprint, 1996), pp. 4-5.
18.   Ibid., p. 5.
19.   Bohm, Wholeness and Implicate Order, p. 124. Ellipsis mine.
20.   Capra, The Tao of Physics, p. 304.
21.   This clarification is obtained from Joseph through written
      communication.
22.   John Polkinghorne, Science and Creation (London: SPCK, 1988), p.
      58.
23. Smolin, The Trouble with Physics, p. 31.
24. Capra, The Tao of Physics, p. 208. Cf. Rupert Sheldrake, A New of
    Life (London: Blond & Briggs, 1981; reprint, 1985), p. 60.
    Sheldrake, The Presence of the Past, pp. 97-99, 118. Capra, The Tao
    of Physics, pp. 186, 193-94, 208. Davies, The Goldilocks Enigma, pp.
    109-110.
25. Capek, The Philosophical Impact of Contemporary Physics, p. 54.
26. Capra, The Tao of Physics, p. 193.
27. Quoted in Pagels, The Cosmic Code, pp. 247-48. Italics and ellipsis
    Pagels'. No reference is given to Weinberg.
28. Polkinghorne, Reason and Reality, p. 87.
29. Harris, The Foundations of Metaphysics in Science, p. 52. Ellipsis
    mine.
30. Albert Einstein and Leopold Infeld, The Evolution of Physics (New
    York: Simon & Schuster, 1938), p. 259.
31. Ibid., p. 257.
32. Einstein, “On the Generalized Theory of Gravity,” Scientific American
    (March 1950): 14, quoted in Sten F. Odenwald, “A Modern Look at
    the Origin of the Universe,” Zygon 25 (March 1990): 32.
33. In Louis de Broglie, Nouvelles Perspectives en Microphysique, pp.
    18788, quoted Capek, The Philosophical Impact of Contemporary
    Physics, p. 319. Italics and Ellipsis Capek's.
34. Quoted in Pagels, Perfect Symmetry, p. 187. Ellipsis and italics found
    in Pagels. No reference is given to Weinberg.
35. Smolin, The Trouble with Physics, p. 38. Italics Smolin's.
36. Capek, The Philosophical Impact of Contemporary Physics, pp. 154-
    55.
37. Bohm, Unfolding Meaning, p. 4.
38. Weyl, Philosophy of Mathematics and Natural Science (Princeton:
    Princeton University Press, 1949), p. 171.
39. Peat, Superstrings and the Search for the Theory of Everything, p.
    304.
40. Incidentally, we note that in his general theory of relativity, Einstein
    likewise replaced the concept of gravitational force by that of space-
    time curvature. Thus, both quantum field theory and the theory of
      relativity have done away with the concept of force replacing it with
      subtler notions of particle interactions and space-time curvature
      respectively.
41.   ‘Virtual' means ‘real in essence, although not in actual fact.' For
      instance, some electronic gadgets give us the experience of virtual
      realities, such as driving a virtual car. It is a real car, but it is not actual
      because it does not exist. Thus, photons which effect exchange
      between electrons are called ‘virtual' to distinguish them from the
      ‘actual' particles that shine in light bulbs and create in us the sensation
      of light. Virtual particles are also called ‘messenger' particles or
      ‘force-carrying' particles, or simply ‘force-carriers.' The concept of
      virtual particle belong to quantum physics, not to classical mechanics.
42.   Hawking, A Brief History of Time, pp. 74-75.
43.   Herbert, Quantum Reality, pp. 213-14.
44.   Pagels, The Cosmic Code, pp. 232-33.
45.   Green, The Elegant Universe, p. 124. Italics Greene's.
46.   Zukav, The Dancing Wu Li Masters, p. 229.
47.   Capra, The Tao of Physics, p. 203.
48.   We will deal with this question in detail in 3.3.2.2.
49.   Zukav, The Dancing Wu Li Masters, p. 224. Cf. Davies and Gribbin,
      The Matter Myth, p. 236. Richard Morris, The Edges of Science
      (London: Fourth Estate, 1992), p. 26.
50.   Davies, The Goldilocks Enigma, p. 112. Cf. John Gribbin, In Search
      of the Big Bang (London: William Heinemann, 1986; Corgi Books,
      1987), pp. 257-60. Panda, Maya in Physics, pp. 134-35. Davies,
      Superforce, pp. 104-105. Pagels, The Cosmic Code, pp. 232-33.
51.   Cf. Hawking, A Brief History of Time, pp. 74-77. Carl Sagan, Cosmos
      (New York: Random House, 1980), pp. 132-34. Smolin, The Life of
      the Cosmos, pp. 46-48, 51-54. Davies, The Goldilocks Enigma, pp.
      163-64.
52.   Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 236.
53.   Capra, The Tao of physics, p. 196.
54.   We have seen in detail the process of electromagnetic interaction
      (3.2.1).
55.   Hawking, A Brief History of Time, pp. 76-77. In physics, an electron
      volt is the amount of kinetic energy gained or lost by a single
      electron. Electron volt gives rise to usages such as eV, KeV, MeV,
      GeV or TeV. The ‘Giga-electron volt (GeV)' is derived from the
      prefix ‘Giga' which refers to one billion and ‘eV' which is ‘electron
      volt.' The symmetry breaking of the electroweak theory is explained
      in detail in 4.3.2.
56.   For Higgs boson see 4.2.2.3.
57.   The name CERN is derived from the acronym for the French ‘Conseil
      Européen pour la Recherche Nucléaire,' or European Council for
      Nuclear Research, a provisional body founded in 1952 with the
      mandate of establishing a world-class fundamental physics research
      organization in Europe.
58.   Cf. Pagels, The Cosmic Code, pp. 233, 236-37. Davies, The
      Goldilocks Enigma, pp. 112-13. Pagels, Perfect Symmetry, pp. 220-
      33. Greene, The Elegant Universe, pp. 121-23. Capra, The Tao of
      Physics, p. 216. https:// www.britannica.com/science/quantum-
      chromodynamics accessed on 20th May 2020.
59.   Greene, The Elegant Universe, p. 123.
60.   Newton (1726), Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica,
      General Scholium, trans. I. Bernard Cohen and Anne Whitman's
      (University of California Press; third edition, 1999), p. 943.
61.   Polkinghorne, Theology in the Context of Science (New Haven: Yale
      University Press, 2009), p. 119.
62.   Hawking, A Brief History of Time, p.36.
63.   Hawking, The Theory of Everything, p. 29.
64.   Thorne, Black Holes and Time Warps, p. 465.
65.   Davies, God and the New Physics (London: J. M. Dent & Sons, 1983;
      Penguin Books, 1984; reprint, 1990), p. 18.
66.   Davies, The Mind of God, p. 50.
67.   Clifford Will in Paul Davies, ed., The New Physics (Cambridge:
      Cambridge University Press, 1989), p. 29.
68.   Quoted in Barrow, The World within the World, p. 306.
69.   Cf. William R. Stoeger, “Contemporary Cosmology and Its
      Implications for the Science-Religion Dialogue,” in Russell, Stoeger
      and Coyne, eds., Physics, Philosophy, and Theology, p. 222.
70. Smolin, The Trouble with Physics, pp. 5-6.
71. Hawking, A Brief History of Time, p. 165.
72. Research in particle physics proceeds for the most part by examining
    the data collected in large particle accelerators like Large Hadron
    Collider (LHC) which smash particles together at sufficiently high
    energies to probe the properties of atomic nuclei in the fallout.
73. Pagels, Perfect Symmetry, p. 314.
74. Greene, The Elegant Universe, p. 396.
75. Bell, Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics
    (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987), p. 27, quoted in
    Coveney, & Highfield, The Arrow of Time, p. 288.
76. See note no. 68.
77. Smolin, The Trouble with Physics, p. 5.
78. Hawking, A Brief History of Time, p. 165.
79. Smolin, The Trouble with Physics, p. 6. Cf. Pagels, Perfect Symmetry,
    pp. 314-16.
80. Gribbin, In Search of the Big Bang, p. 335.
81. Eddington, Nature (March 1918): 36, quoted in Steven Winstein,
    “Quantum Gravity,” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
    https://plato. stanford.edu/entries/quantum-gravity/ accessed on 7 th
    March 2020.
82. Boslough, Stephen Hawking's Universe, p. 87.
83. Winstein, “Quantum Gravity.”
84. For this reason, Pagels calls Einstein the ‘last of the classical
    physicist.' (Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 15).
85. Bohm, “The Implicate Order,” p. 21. Italics Bohm's.
86. Capek, The Philosophical Impact of Contemporary Physics, p. 18.
87. Stoeger, “Key Developments in Physics Challenging Philosophy and
    Theology,” in Mark Richardson and Wesley Wildman, eds., Religion
    and Science: History, Method, Dialogue (London: Routledge, 1996),
    p. 195.
88. Peat, Superstrings and the Search for the Theory of Everything, p. 19.
89. Stoeger, “Key Developments in Physics Challenging Philosophy and
    Theology,” p. 196.
90. Ibid., p. 197.
91.  Winstein, “Quantum Gravity.”
92.  Hawking, A Brief History of Time, pp. 147-48.
93.  Hawking, The Theory of Everything, p. 87.
94.  Ibid. Ellipsis mine.
95.  Topology in general is the classification of shapes into groups that can
     be deformed into one another without ripping or tearing their
     structure in any way.
96. Odenwald, “A Modern Look at the Origin of the Universe,” pp. 32-
     33.
97. Thorne, Black Holes and Time Warps, pp. 476-77.
98. Ibid., p. 477.
99. Davies, The Goldilocks Enigma, p. 291.
100. Rem B. Edwards, What Caused the Big Bang? (New York: Rodo pi,
     2001), p. 124. The designations of quantum vacuum given by
     Gribbin and Drees are found on the same page.
101. Cf. Peat, Superstrings and the Search for the Theory of Everything,
     pp. 18-19, 21. Paul Davies, Space and Time in the Modern Universe
     (Cambridge: Cambridge University press, 1977), pp. 137-38. A. G.
     Pacholezyk, The Catastrophic Universe (Tucson, Arizona: Pachart
     Publishing House, 1984), p. 69. Joseph Mathew, In Search of Cosmic
     Origins, pp. 100-104. Odenwald, “A Modern Look at the Origin of
     the Universe,” pp. 32-33.
102. The Newtonian space is flat, and its properties are described by
     Euclidean geometry. Such Newtonian-Euclidean space was believed
     to be a requirement for our perception of the world of our ordinary
     experience. On account of the close affinity of human reason with
     Newtonian space and Euclidean geometry, Capek calls it ‘the
     Newtonian-Euclidean form of intellect.' This mode of understanding
     is adjusted to the ‘zone of the middle dimensions' which is situated
     between the megacosm of flying galaxies and the microcosm of
     fleeting subatomic particles. (Capek, The Philosophical Impact of
     Contemporary Physics, p. xiv. Capek, Bergson and Modern Physics,
     p. 258.)
103. Newton, Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy, trans. A.
     Motte, revised by F. Cajori (University of California Press, 1950),
     Scholium II, quoted in Capek, The Philosophical Impact of
     Contemporary Physics, p. 7.
104. Capra, The Tao of Physics, p. 165.
105. Peat, Superstrings and the Search for the Theory of Everything, p. 19.
106. Smolin, The Trouble with Physics, p. 152. Italics Smolin's.
107. Briggs and Peat, Looking Glass Universe, p. 140. Italics the authors'.
108. Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 253.
109. Ibid., p. 252.
110. Ibid.
111. Greene, The Elegant Universe, p. 130.
112. Ibid., pp. 127-31. Cf. Paul Davies, “The Unfolding Universe,” in Sara
     Nash, ed., Science and Complexity (London: Science Reviews Ltd,
     1985), pp. 41-42. Davies and Gribbin, The Matter Myth, pp. 136-37.
     N. C. Panda, The Vibrating Universe (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidas,
     1995; reprint, 2008), p. 332.
113. Hawking, A Brief History of Time, pp. 42-43.
114. When Einstein heard about Edwin Hubble's discovery of the flight of
     galaxies and the consequent expansion of the universe, he eliminated
     the cosmological constant from his equations by setting its strength to
     zero. From the 1930s until the late 1990s, most physicists assumed
     the cosmological constant to be equal to zero. However, in 1998 it
     was discovered that the expansion of the universe is accelerating; this
     implies the possibility of a positive non-zero value for the
     cosmological constant.
115. Davies, “What Caused the Big Bang?” p. 227.
116. Cf. Steven Weinberg, Dreams of a Final Theory (London:
     Hutchinson, 1993; Vintage edition, 1993), p. 179.
117. Davies, “What Caused the Big Bang?” p. 228.
118. Weinberg, Dreams of a Final Theory, p. 179. Ellipsis mine. Please
     note that we have already referred to this energy density of the
     universe: “In one cubic centimetre of empty space the amount of
     energy is much greater than the total amount of energy of all the
     matter in the known universe.” (See note no.107)
119. But the problem is that if the value of the cosmological constant were
     so enormous, (10 120 times bigger than its observed value), the
     universe, if at all it exists, would be totally different from the one in
     which we live; we would not find ourselves living in a universe just
     right for life. Many physicists have openly admitted this fact.
     Weinberg confesses: “With the total cosmological constant this large,
     space would be so radically curved that it would bear no resemblance
     to the familiar three-dimensional space of Euclidean geometry in
     which we live.” (Weinberg, Dreams of a Final Theory, p. 180).
     Similarly, Larry Abbott remarks: “If the vacuum energy density, or
     equivalently the cosmological constant, were as large as theories of
     elementary particles suggest, the universe in which we live would be
     dramatically different, with properties we would find both bizarre and
     unsettling.” [Abbott, “The Mystery of the Cosmological Constant,”
     Scientific American Vol. 3, No. 1 (1991): 72].
120. Smolin, The Trouble with Physics, p. 152.
121. Ibid.
122. Davies, Superforce, p. 104.
123. Malville, Time and Eternal Change (New Delhi: Sterling Publishers,
     1990), p. 106.
124. Quoted in Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 252. No reference to Wheeler
     is given.
125. Ibid., p. 254.
126. Capra, The Tao of Physics, p. 209.
127. Bohm, Unfolding Meaning (London: Routledge, 1985; Ark
     paperbacks reprint, 1996), p. 4.
128. Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 223. The symmetry between matter and
     antimatter demands that for every particle there has to be an anti-
     particle with equal mass and opposite charge. The anti-particle of
     electron is positron, and it has positive electric charge, and many anti-
     matter versions, such as anti-protons, were discovered. The total
     number of anti-particles so far discovered is about eighty. There could
     be atoms of anti-hydrogen composed of an anti-proton and a
     positron. Whole anti-matter universes could exist; perhaps distant
     galaxies are made out of anti-matter.
129. Malville, Time and Eternal Change, p. 105. We had referred to similar
     creation of virtual particles in connection with the process of
     ‘scattering,' that is, emission and absorption of particles. See 3.2.1.
130. Greene, The Elegant Universe, p. 396.
131. Note that 10 -24 is the smaller number.
132. Capek, Bergson and Modern Physics, p. 13.
133. Quoted in Timothy Ferris, The Whole Shebang (Simon & Schuster,
     1997), p. 97.
134. Malville, Time and Eternal Change, pp. 105-106.
135. Greene, The Elegant Universe, p. 129. Italics Greene's.
136. Capra, The Tao of Physics, p. 69.
137. Pagels, Perfect Symmetry, p. 194. Cf. Thorne, Black Holes and Time
     Warps, p. 431. Panda, Maya in Physics, pp. 134-35. Morris, The
     Edges of Science, pp. 24-25. Davies, Superforce, pp. 104-105. Capra,
     The Tao of Physics, pp. 67-69, 223-24.
138. Quoted in Pagels, Perfect Symmetry, p. 194. No reference to
     Heisenberg is given. Ellipses found in Pagels.

                 4. THE STANDARD MODEL OF PARTICLE PHYSICS

1.   It is to be noted that unlike protons and neutrons, neutrinos do not
     enter into the constitution of physical objects.
2.   Pagels, Perfect Symmetry, p. 276.
3.   Cf. Smolin, The Life of the Cosmos, pp. 56-57. Pagels, Perfect
     Symmetry, pp. 209-210. Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 284.
     https://www.sciencealert. com/the-standard-model accessed on 14th
     Feb. 2021.
4.   Smolin, The Life of the Cosmos, p. 70.
5.   The name ‘boson' was coined by Paul Dirac to commemorate the
     contribution of Satyendra Nath Bose, an Indian physicist, in
     developing with Einstein, Bose-Einstein statistics which theorizes the
     characteristics of elementary particles. It was also Dirac who named
     the other class of elementary particles ‘fermions' in honour of the
     eminent Italian physicist Enrico Fermi.
6.   Half-integer is a number obtained by dividing an odd integer by two,
     like 1/2, 3/2, 5/2.
7.   The Pauli Exclusion Principle has far-reaching consequences, such as
      solidity of matter, structure of atoms, rules of chemistry and stability
      of stars.
8.    Gribbin, The Omega Point, p. 222.
9.    Cf. Pagels, Perfect Symmetry, pp. 184, 318. Davies, The Goldilocks
      Enigma, pp. 121-22. Smolin, The Trouble with Physics, pp. 67-68.
      Peat, Superstrings and the Search for the Theory of Everything, p. 11.
      https://www.thoughtco.com/boson-2699112. https://www.sciencealert.
      com/the-standard-model accessed on 14th Feb. 2021.
10.   The word ‘hadron' comes from the Greek adros, meaning ‘thick,'
      ‘robust,' ‘massive,' or ‘large.' It refers to the ability of the point-like
      quarks to bind together and form particles that are ‘thick' (hadron) in a
      certain sense. The word ‘quark' originally appeared in a single line of
      the novel Finnegans Wake by the Irish author James Joyce
      (18821941). The main character of the book is a publican, named
      Humphrey Chimpden Earwicker who dreams that he is serving beer to
      a drunken seagull. Instead of asking for ‘three quarts for Mister Mark,'
      the drunken bird says, ‘three quarks for Muster Mark.'
11.   Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 207.
12.   Quoted in Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 220. No reference to Glashow
      is given. Italics found in Pagels.
13.   The word ‘lepton' means ‘light,' or ‘swift.'
14.   Cf. Pagels, The Cosmic Code, pp. 199-203, 207-208, 213-14, 225-30.
      Pagels, Perfect Symmetry, pp. 207, 212-16, 219.
15.   For gauge symmetry in particle physics, see 4.3.2.
16.   Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 232.
17.   We have already dealt with these gauge bosons as exchange particles
      or force-carriers in 3.2.2. But here we narrate them as part of the
      Standard Model. Obviously, some overlapping is unavoidable.
18.   Cf. Pagels, The Cosmic Code, pp. 231-40. Pagels, Perfect Symmetry,
      pp. 210, 219-23. https://www.google.com/search?
      q=what+is+a+guage+-
      boson&oq=&aqs=chrome.0.69i59i450l8.439798j0j7&sourceid=-
      chrome&ie=UTF-8
19.   Popularly, the Higgs boson is known as ‘God particle.' It is taken from
      the title of the book The God Particle (1993) by Nobel Laureate Leon
      Lederman. The nickname is strongly disliked by many physicists,
      including Peter Higgs himself who regards it as sensationalism.
20.   Davies, The Goldilocks Enigma, pp. 177-80, 188-89. Pagels, The
      Cosmic Code, p. 222. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Higgs_boson.
      https:// en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Higgs_mechanism
21.   Smolin, The Life of the Cosmos, p. 61. Italics Smolin's.
22.   Smolin, The Trouble with Physics, p. 56. Italics Smolin's.
23.   Barrow, Theories of Everything, p. 75.
24.   Ibid., p. 76.
25.   Pagels, Perfect Symmetry, pp. 178-79.
26.   Davies, The Goldilocks Enigma, p. 181. Italics Davies'. Ellipsis mine.
27.   Ferromagnetism refers to the magnetic field associated with iron,
      cobalt, nickel and some alloys or compounds containing one or more
      of these elements.
28.   For iron, Curie temperature is 770°C.
29.   Davies, The Goldilocks Enigma, p. 182.
30.   Cf. Davies, The Goldilocks Enigma, pp. 179-82. Barrow, Theories of
      Everything, pp. 116-19. Familiar phase transitions are changes from a
      liquid state to a solid state or a gaseous state. When water vapour
      condenses to form droplets, or liquid water freezes to ice, an initially
      featureless state abruptly and spontaneously acquires structure and
      complexity.
31.   Smolin, The Trouble with Physics, p. 57. Italics Smolin's. Ellipsis
      mine.
32.   Greene, The Elegant Universe, p. 416. Italics Greene's.
33.   Davies, The Cosmic Blueprint, p. 126.
34.   Barrow, Theories of Everything, p. 21. Ellipsis mine.
35.   Smolin, The Trouble with Physics, p. 62.
36.   Peat Superstrings and the Search for the Theory of Everything, p. 87.
37.   Ibid.
38.   Ibid.
39.   Ibid.
40.   Smolin, The Life of the Cosmos, p. 69.
41.   Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 275.
42. Pagels, The Perfect Symmetry, p. 229. Cf. Greene, The Elegant
    Universe, p. 416. Davies, The Goldilocks Enigma, p. 186. Barrow,
    Theories of Everything, p. 73. Smolin, The Trouble with Physics, p. 58.
    Peat, Superstrings and the Search for the Theory of Everything, pp.
    84-87. Davies, The Cosmic Blueprint, p. 127.
43. Peat, Superstrings and the Search for the Theory of Everything, pp.
    88-89.
44. Girbbin, The Omega Point, p. 223.
45. Smolin, The Life of the Cosmos, p. 66. Cf. Greene, The Elegant
    Universe, p. 416. Davies, The Goldilocks Enigma, p. 186. Barrow,
    Theories of Everything, p. 73. Smolin, The Trouble with Physics, p. 58.
    Davies, The Cosmic Blueprint, p. 127. Peat, Superstrings and the
    Search for the Theory of Everything, pp. 84-87.
46. Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 278.
47. Polkinghorne, Reason and Reality, p. 23.
48. Quoted in Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 229. Ellipses found in Pagels.
    No reference to Weinberg is given. Cf. Peat, Superstrings and the
    Search for the Theory of Everything, pp. 78, 87-89. Smolin, The
    Trouble with Physics, pp. 60, 62. Pagels, Perfect Symmetry, pp. 205-
    206, 224, 228. Davies, The Cosmic Blueprint, p. 81. Smolin, The Life
    of the Cosmos, p. 65. Pagels, The Cosmic Code, pp. 275, 277.
    Gribbin, The Omega Point, p. 223. Barrow, Theories of Everything, p.
    73. Davies, The Goldilocks Enigma, pp. 181-83, 188-89.
49. Barrow, Theories of Everything, pp. 117-18.
50. Pagels, The Cosmic Code, pp. 241-42.
51. Ibid., p. 242.
52. Barrow, Theories of Everything, p. 131.
53. Hawking, A Brief History of Time, p. 79. Ellipsis mine.
54. Pagels, Perfect Symmetry, p. 254.
55. Ibid., pp. 252-53. Ellipsis mine. Cf. Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 242.
    Davies, The Goldilocks Enigma, p. 184. Davies, The Cosmic
    Blueprint, p. 127.
56. The difference between the three types of leptons - electron, muon and
    tau -- is referred to as flavours.
57. B mesons are mesons composed of a bottom anti-quark and either an
      up, down, strange or charm quark.
58.   http://www.sci-news.com/physics/cern-lepton-universality-09476.html
      Science News, accessed on 20 th May 2021
59.   Ibid.
60.   Ibid.
61.   https://www.tu-dortmund.de/en/nachrichtendetail/detail/grow-ing-
      hints-of-lepton-universality-violation-8237/
62.   A spinning top, or simply a top, is a toy with a thick body and a sharp
      point at the bottom; it is designed to be spun on its vertical axis,
      balancing on the tip due to the gyroscopic effect. Once set in motion, a
      top will usually wobble for a few seconds, spin upright for a while,
      then start to wobble again with increasing amplitude as it loses energy
      (angular momentum), and finally tip over and roll on its side. Tops
      exist in many variations and materials, chiefly wood, metal and plastic,
      often with a metal tip.
63.   ‘g' is the short form of ‘gyromagnetic ratio.'
64.   https://news.fnal.gov/2021/04/first-results-from-fermilabs-muon-g-2-
      experiment-strengthen-evidence-of-new-physics/
65.   https://www.nsf.gov/discoveries/disc_summ.jsp?cntn_id=302464
66.   Cf.
      https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Physics_beyond_the_Standard_Model
      accessed on 20th May 2021. https://news.fnal.gov/2021/04/first-
      results-from-fermilabs-muon-g-2-experiment-strengthen-evidence-of-
      new-physics/ accessed on 15 th Sept. 2021.
      https://news.uchicago.edu/story/ what-muon-g-2-results-mean-how-
      we-understand-universe accessed on 15 th Sept. 2021.
67.   Hawking, A Brief History of Time, p. 79.
68.   Pagels, Perfect Symmetry, p. 277.
69.   According to the Standard Model, protons are stable particles. In
      particle physics, a magnetic monopole is a hypothetical elementary
      particle that is an isolated magnet with only one magnetic pole (a north
      pole without a south pole or vice versa). Cf. Pagels, Perfect Symmetry,
      pp. 278, 28184, 289-90, 294. Gribbin, The Omega Point, p. 224.
      Pagels, The Cosmic Code, pp. 281, 284.
      https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grand_Unified_Theo-
      ry#:~:text=A%20Grand%20Unified%20Theory%20(GUT,merged%20
      into%20a%20single%20force.
70.   Peat, Superstrings and the Search for the Theory of Everything, p. 90.
71.   Briggs and Peat, Looking Glass Universe, pp. 77-78.
72.   Reported by Richard Wolkomir, “Quark City,” Omni, February 1984,
      p.41. quoted in Davies, The Cosmic Blueprint, p. 13.
73.   Hawking, A Brief History of Time, p. 11.
74.   Barrow, Theories of Everything, p. 1.
75.   Ibid., p. 10. Cf. Pagels, Perfect Symmetry, pp. 226, 274-76. Pagels,
      The Cosmic Code, pp. 231-32, 236-37.
76.   Lawrence Sklar, “Determinism,” in Jaegwon Kim and Ernest Sosa,
      eds., A Companion to Metaphysics (Oxford: Blackwell, 1995), p. 118.
77.   Laplace, Introduction a la Théorie Analytiqe des Probabilités Oeuvres
      Complètes (Paris, 1886), p. 6, quoted in Capek, The Philosophical
      Impact of Contemporary Physics, p. 122.
78.   Briggs and Peat, Looking Glass Universe, p. 69. Ellipsis mine.
79.   Hawking, A Brief History of Time, p. 163. Ellipses mine.
80.   Gribbin, The Omega Point , p. 226.
81.   Hawking, A Brief History of Time, p.163. Ellipses mine.
82.   The original idea of both figure and text is borrwoed from Barrow,
      The World within the World, p. 186; the figure is adapted and
      modified.
83.   Pagels, Perfect Symmetry, p. 276.
84.   Barrow, Theories of Everything, pp. 75-76. Italics Barrow's.
85.   Ibid., p. 21.
86.   Pagels, Perfect Symmetry, p. 272.
87.   Davies, The Goldilocks Enigma, pp. 296-97.
88.   Boslough, Stephen Hawking's Universe, p. 121.
89.   Pagels, Perfect Symmetry, pp. 230-31.
90.   John D. Barrow, The Origin of the Universe (London: Wiedenfeld &
      Nicolson, 1994; Phoenix paperbacks, 1995; reprint, 2001), p. 123.
91.   Pagels, Perfect Symmetry, p. 275.
92.   Ibid.
93.   Quoted in Pagels, Perfect Symmetry, p. 231. No reference to Einstein
     is given. Italics Pagels'.
94. Davies, The Goldilocks Enigma, p. 297.
95. Penrose, The Emperor's New Mind, p. 141.
96. Doughlas R. Hofstadter, Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden
     Braid (Basic Books, 1977; Penguin Books, 1981), p. 265.
97. Morris Kline, Mathematics: The Loss of Certainty (Oxford: Oxford
     University Press, 1980), p. 316.
98. Freeman Dyson, The New York Review of Books (NYRB), May 13,
     2004. Ellipsis mine.
99. Redhead, From Physics to Metaphysics (Cambridge: Cambridge
     University Press, 1995), p. 85.
100. Kafatos and Nadeau, The Conscious Universe, pp. 174-75.
101. Davies, The Mind of God, p. 167.
102. Barrow, Theories of Everything, p. 210.
103. Davies, The Goldilocks Enigma, p. 241.
104. Hawking, A Brief History of Time, p.184. Ellipsis mine.
105. Davies, The Goldilocks Enigma, p. 236.
106. Ibid., p. 237.
107. Drees, Beyond the Big Bang, pp. 72-73.
108. Pagels, Perfect Symmetry, p. 230. Ellipsis mine. Cf. Peat, Superstrings
     and the Search for the Theory of Everything, p. 83. Smolin, The Life of
     the Cosmos, p. 60.
     https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theory_of_everything.

                  5. THE QUANTUM WORLD aND THE OBSERVER

1. John Honner, The Description of Nature (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
   1987), p. 218.
2. Hooker, “The Nature of Quantum Mechanical Reality,” p. 72.
3. Zukav, The Dancing Wu Li Masters, p. 29.
4. Heisenberg, The Physical Principles of the Quantum Theory, trans.
   Carl Eckhart and Frank C. Hoyt (New York: Dover Publications, 1930;
   reprint, 1949), pp. 62-63.
5. Quoted in Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 87. No reference to Born is
   given.
6. Davies and Gribbin, The Matter Myth, p. 208.
7. Zukav, The Dancing Wu Li Masters, p. 30. Ellipsis mine.
8. Randall, Jr. The Making of the Modern Mind (New York: Columbia
    University Press, 1926; 50 th ann. edition, 1976), pp. 259-60.
9. Zukav, The Dancing Wu Li Masters, p. 30.
10. Errol E. Harris, Cosmos and Anthropos (London: Humanities Press,
    1999. , p. 144.
11. Paul Davies, Other Worlds (London: J. M. Dent & Sons, 1980;
    Penguin books, 1988), p. 49.
12. Burtt, The Metaphysical Foundations of Modern Physical Science, p.
    90.
13. Alastair Rae, Quantum Physics: Illusion or Reality? (Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press, 1986; Canto edition, 1994; reprint, 2000.
    , p. 68. Cf. David Bohm, “The Implicate Order,” p. 32. David
    Hodgson, The Mind Matters (Oxford: Oxford University Press,1991;
    paperback edition, 1993), pp. 208-209. Hooker, “The Nature of
    Quantum Mechanical Reality,” p. 72. Morris Kline, Mathematics and
    the Search for Knowledge, p. 244. Zukav, The Dancing Wu Li Masters,
    pp. 29-30.
14. Popper, Quantum Theory and Schism in Physics (London: Routledge,
    1982; reprint, 2000), p. 40. Italics Popper's.
15. Davies and Gribbin, The Matter Myth, pp. 208-209. Ellipsis mine.
16. See 2.4.2.
17. Barbour, Religion and Science, pp. 172-73.
18. Niels Bohr, Atomic Theory and the Description of Nature (Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press, 1934), p. 53.
19. Heisenberg, The Principles of the Quantum Theory, p. 3.
20. Davies and Gribbin, The Matter Myth, p. 210.
21. See 2.4.1.
22. Barr, Modern Physics and Ancient Faiths (Notre Dame: University of
    Notre Dame Press, 2003), p. 234. Ellipsis mine.
23. Davies, The Cosmic Blueprint, p. 166. Italics Davies'.
24. This is precisely what Many Worlds hypothesis postulates. It eliminates
    the observer by affirming that all quantum possibilities described by
    wave function are actual - of course in an infinite number of universes.
25. Barr, Modern Physics and Ancient Faiths, p.232.
26. Wigner, Symmetries and Reflections (Bloomington: Indiana University
    Press, 1967), pp. 183, 188, 192, quoted in Bob Toben and Fred Alan
    Wolf, Space-Time and Beyond (New York: E. P. Dutton, 1975; Bantam
    Books reprint, 1987), p. 130. The first ellipsis and italics are authors'
    and the second ellipsis is mine.
27. Herbert, Quantum Reality, p. 148.
28. Jammar, The Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics (John Wiley & Sons,
    1974), p. 480.
29. Capra, The Turning Point, pp. 76-77.
30. Walter Heitler, “Departure from Classical Thought in Modern Physics,”
    in Paul A. Schilpp, ed., Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist, p. 194,
    quoted in Popper, Quantum Theory and Schism in Physics, p. 119.
    Italics Popper's. Popper remarks that this is “perhaps the sharpest
    formulation of this doctrine of the involvement of the subject with the
    physical object; but it also frequently occurs, in one form or other, in
    Heisenberg's Physical Principles of the Quantum Theory, and in many
    other statements of the orthodox view.” (Ibid. Italics Popper's.)
31. Barr, Modern Physics and Ancient Faiths, p. 238.
32. Ibid. Ellipsis mine.
33. Ibid., p. 231.
34. Ibid., p. 238. Italics Barr's.
35. Ibid., pp. 229-33.
36. Ibid., pp. 241-42.
37. Popper, Quantum Theory and Schism in Physics, p. 35. Italics
    Popper's.
38. Quoted in Barr, Modern Physics and Ancient Faiths, p. 242.
39. Ibid., p. 252. We have dealt with Many Worlds Hypothesis in 2.4.2.
40. Bohr, “Discussion with Einstein on Epistemological Problems in
    Atomic Physics,” in P. A. Schilpp, ed., Albert Einstein: Philosopher-
    Scientist, pp. 232, quoted in Popper, Quantum Theory and the Schism
    in Physics, p. 40. Italics and ellipsis Popper's.
41. Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 133.
42. Russell, “Quantum Physics in Philosophical and Theological
    Perspective,” p. 349.
43. R. Blanché, Contemporary Science and Rationalism, p. 23.
44. Harris, Cosmos and Anthropos, p. 15.
45. Ibid.
46. Blanché, Contemporary Science and Rationalism, p. 21.
47. Quoted in R. W. Clark, Einstein: The Life and Times (New York: Avon
    Books, 1971), p. 120. No reference to Eddington is given.
48. Barbour, Religion and Science, p. 185.
49. Davies, Other Worlds, p. 42.
50. Sachs, “Space-Time and Elementary Interactions in Relativity,” Physics
    Today 22 (Feb. 1969): 53, quoted in Capra, The Tao of Physics, pp.
    15253. Ellipsis Capra's.
51. Davies, Other Worlds, p. 49.
52. Ibid.
53. John Barrow and Frank Tipler, The Anthropic Cosmological Principle
    (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1986), p. 460.
54. Bohm, Causality and Chance in Modern Physics, p. 92. Italics Bohm's.
55. Capra, The Tao of Physics, p. 126.
56. Joseph, “The Nature of Knowledge of the Physical World,” p. 71.
57. Rae, Quantum Physics: Illusion or Reality? p. 69.
58. Skirbekk and Gilje, A History of Western Thought, trans. Ronald
    Worley (Routledge: London; English translation, 2001), p. 226.
59. Heisenberg, Physics and Philosophy, quoted in Michael Talbot,
    Mysticism and the New Physics (Bantam Books, 1981), p. 3. Ellipsis
    Talbot's.
60. Coveney & Highfield, The Arrow of Time, p.125.
61. Prigogine and Stengers, Order out of Chaos, pp. 224-25.
62. Quoted in John C. Eccles, The Human Mystery (London: Springer
    International, 1979), p. 30.
63. John A. Wheeler, in J. Mehra, ed., The Physicist's Conception of
    Nature (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1973), p. 244.
64. Linde, “Inflation, Quantum Cosmology and the Anthropic Principle,”
    in John Barrow, Paul Davies and Charles Harper, eds., Science and
    Ultimate Reality (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), p.
    426.
65. Reported by Tim Folger, “Does the Universe Exist if We're not
    Looking?” Discover Magazine 23 (June 2002): 43, quoted in Davies,
    The Goldilocks Enigma, p. 261. Ellipsis Davies'..
66. Eddington, The Nature of the Physical World (Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press, 1931), p. 332.
67. Davies, Other Worlds, pp. 12-13.
68. Quoted in Herbert, Quantum Reality, p. 25.
69. Cf. Zukav, The Dancing Wu Li Masters, pp. 92-95. Capra, The Tao of
    Physics, pp. 126-28.

                         6. THE QUANTUM COSMOLOGY

1.  Davies, The Goldilocks Enigma, p. 86.
2.  Hawley and Holocomb, Foundations of Modern Cosmology, p. 508.
3.  See 3.3.1.1.
4.  Pagels, Perfect Symmetry, p. 250.
5.  Hawking, The Theory of Everything, p. 85.
6.  Davies, The Goldilocks Enigma, p. 85.
7.  Newton, Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy, scholium I,
    quoted in
8. Capek, The Philosophical Impact of Contemporary Physics, p. 36.
9. Ibid., p. 48.
10. Ibid., p. 124.
11. Capek, Bergson and Modern Physics, p. 259. Italics Capek's.
12. Capek, The Philosophical Impact of Contemporary Physics, p. 124.
13. Whitehead, Science and the Modern World, p. 73, quoted in Capek,
    The Philosophical Impact of Contemporary Physics, pp. 123-24. Italics
    found in Capek.
14. One chapter in Capek's work, The Philosophical Impact
    ofContemporary Physics, is entitled “The implicit elimination of time in
    classical physics,” p. 121.
15. Peacocke, “Theology and Science Today,” in Ted Peters, ed., Cosmos
    as Creation: Science and Theology in Consonance (Nashville:
    Abingdon Press, 1989), p. 33.
16. Capek, The Philosophical Impact of Contemporary Physics, p. 168.
17. Ibid., p. 168. Italics Capek's.
18. Ibid., p. 161. Italics Capek's.
19. Polkinghorne, Theology in the Context of Science, p. 119.
20. See 3.3.1.2.
21. Coveney & Highfield, The Arrow of Time, p. 143.
22. Stoeger, “Key Developments in Physics Challenging Philosophy and
    Theology,” p. 196.
23. Ibid., p. 197.
24. Gribbin, The Omega Point, p. 63.
25. Ibid.
26. Hawking, “The Edge of Spacetime,” quoted in Gribbin, The Omega
    Point, p. 63. Ellipsis partly Gribbin's and partly mine.
27. Davies, The Goldilocks Enigma, pp. 87, 89. Italics Davies'.
28. Hawking, The Theory of Everything, p. 91.
29. Hawking, A Brief History of Time, p. 147.
30. In this picture, space-time looks like an upside-down cone, but apart
    from the sharp apex at the base, not too much importance should be
    given on the shape.
31. Davies, The Goldilocks Enigma, pp. 89-91.
32. Ibid., 86.
33. Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 256.
34. The different names given to quantum vacuum by Gribbin, Sato and
    Drees are found in Edwards, What Caused the Big Bang? p. 125.
35. Ibid., p. 124. Italics Edwards'.
36. Davies, The Goldilocks Enigma, p. 95.
37. Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 253.
38. Gal-Or, Cosmology, Physics, and Philosophy, pp. 243-44.
39. Davies, The Mind of God, p. 70.
40. Drees, “Theology and Cosmology beyond the Big Bang Theory,” in
    Jan Fennema and Paul Iain, eds., Science and Religion: One World-
    Changing Perspectives on Reality (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
    Publishers, 1990), p. 100.
41. Worm hole is a hypothetical tunnel through the fabric of space-time. A
    wormhole can be thought of as a short-cut through space-time, a
    cosmic subway connecting two black holes, or in the present case, two
    child universes.
42. Davies, The Goldilocks Enigma, p. 291.
43. Drees, “Theology and Cosmology beyond the Big Bang Theory,” p.
    110. Cf. Joseph Mathew, In Search of Cosmic Origins, pp. 103-109.
44. Gribbin, Companion to the Cosmos, p. 263.
45. Davies, The Goldilocks Enigma, p. 94. Italics Davies'. Cf. Davies and
    Gribbin, The Matter Myth, pp. 41-44, 156-67. Davies, The Mind of
    God, pp. 61-73. Greene, The Elegant Universe, pp. 4, 127-30, 358-59.
    Davies, The Edge of Infinity, pp. xv-xvi, 68, 173, 179-82. Hawley and
    Holocomb, Foundations of Modern Cosmology, pp. 354-55, 508-509.
    Stoeger, “Key Developments in Physics Challenging Philosophy and
    Theology,” pp. 192-97.
    A word of caution about theories like chaotic/eternal inflation and also
    about concepts like quantum foam, mother/child universes, is in order.
    Davies warns that speculations about quantum space-time foam and
    chaotic inflation depend on the validity of quantum mechanics when
    applied to the whole universe. “Quite apart from the astonishing
    extrapolation involved in applying a theory of subatomic particles to
    the entire cosmos, there are deep questions concerning the meaning to
    be attached to certain mathematical objects in the theory.” (Davies, The
    Mind of God, p. 62) Similarly, Pagels cautions us that “all these models
    involve the stretching of current theories and concepts far beyond
    where they have been tested and hence are no more than imaginative
    guesses. . . . A whole community of very smart scientists may have
    talked themselves into a theory of the very early universe that in the
    future (with the wisdom of hindsight) will be seen as a fantasy based
    on incomplete information and imaginative extrapolation. Theory
    building, while it creates a framework for thought, is never a substitute
    for experiment and observation.” (Pagels, Perfect Symmetry, p. 366.
    Ellipsis mine). John Polkinghorne is very sceptical about speculations
    on quantum cosmology. He says: “Those who essay a quantum
    cosmology are necessarily skating on intellectual thin ice, however
    pretty the arabesques they perform.” [Polkinghorne, “The Mind of
    God? Symposium: Hawking's A Brief History of Time Reconsidered,”
    The Cambridge Review (March 1992): 1].
46. Edwards, What Caused the Big Bang? pp. 125-28. Cf. Gribbin and
    Rees, Cosmic Coincidences, p. 280.
47. Gribbin, Cosmic Coincidences, p. 280.
48. As some cosmologists have suggested, Big Bang is here identified with
    the creation of a child universe through quantum fluctuation.
49. Cf. Davies, “What Caused the Big Bang?” p. 228. Igor Novikov, Black
    Holes and the Universe, trans. Vitaly Kisin (Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press, 1990; Canto edition, 1995), p. 160.
50. Novikov, Black Holes and the Universe, p. 160. The freezing of water
    into ice is an instance of phase transition. Liquid water is symmetrical,
    the same at every point and in every direction. However, when ice
    crystals form, they will have definite positions and will be lined up in
    some direction. This breaks the symmetry of water.
51. Cf. Davies and Gribbin, The Matter Myth, pp. 158, 160.
52. Gribbin, Companion to the Cosmos, pp. 18-19.
53. Davies, The Goldilocks Enigma, p. 38.
54. Gribbin, Companion to the Cosmos, p. 18.
55. Stoeger, “Developments in Contemporary Cosmology: The Challenges
    and Opportunities to Religion,” Omega 9 (Dec. 2010): 72.
56. Davies, The Goldilocks Enigma, p. 37.
57. Paul Davies, The Last Three Minutes (London: Wiedenfeld &
    Nicolson, 1994; Phoenix paperback, 1995), p. 129.
58. Ibid., p. 130. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/False_vacuum accessed on
    23 rd Sept. 2020.
59. Davies, The Last Three Minutes, pp. 130-31.
60. Accessed from the net and adapted.https://www.google.com/ search?
    q=quantum+tunnelling&rlz=1C1GCEJ_enIN971IN971&-
    source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&sqi=2&ved=2ahUKEwjz3tuE_5vzAh-
    VMqJUCHV-
    xDDYQ_AUoAXoECAEQAw&biw=1366&bih=657&d-
    pr=1#imgrc=SUfLxqrshQysYM
61. The figure and explanation are taken from Davies, The Last Three
    Minutes, pp. 131-33; the figure is modified.
62. Ibid., p. 133.
63. Quoted in Pagels, Perfect Symmetry, p. 351.
64. Quoted in Davies, The Last Three Minutes, p. 134. Ellipsis mine.
65. Ibid., p. 135. Cf. Novikov, Black Holes and the Universe, pp. 170-71.
    Pagels, Perfect Symmetry, pp. 350-51. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
    Dark_energy.
66. Davies, The Goldilocks Enigma, p. 1.

                                 EPILOGUE

1. Feynman, QED: The Strange Theory of Light and Matter (Princeton:
    Princeton University Press, 1988). Page number is not available.
2. Quoted in Karen Michelle Barad, Meeting the Universe Halfway
    (2007), p. 254, with a footnote citing The Philosophical Writings of
    Niels Bohr (1998).
3. Reported by Freeman Dyson in his paper “Innovation in Physics,”
    Scientific American 199 (Sept. 1958): 74-82; reprinted in “JingShin
    Theoretical Physics Symposium in Honour of Professor Ta-You Wu,”
    edited by Jong-Ping Hsu & Leonardo Hsu (Singapore, River Edge; N.
    J: World Scientific, 1998), pp. 73-90.
    https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Niels_Bohr, accessed on 8 th May 2020.
4. Heisenberg, Physics and Philosophy, p. 42. Ellipsis mine.
5. Quotes from Wheeler, Einstein and Penrose are taken from
    https://shorts. quantumlah.org/quantum-quotes, accessed on 16 th July
    2020.
6. Feynmann, The Character of Physical Law (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
    Press, 1965), p. 129.
7. Zukav, The Dancing Wu li Masters, p. 87.
8. Capek, The Philosophical Impact of Contemporary Physics, p. xiv.
9. http://www.exactlywhatistime.com/physics-of-time/quantum-time/
10. Greene, The Elegant Universe, p. 87. Italics Greene's.
11. Polkinghorne, “The Quantum World,” p. 335.
12. Blanché, Contemporary Science and Rationalism, p. 38.
13. Ibid.
14. Capra, The Tao of Physics, p. 56. We think and speak of everything
    even events as things or substances. According to Aristotelian
    philosophy, the subject of every sentence is substance.
15. Capek, The Philosophical Impact of Contemporary Physics, p. 306.
    Italics Capek's.
16. Polkinghorne, Reason and Reality, p. 86.
17. Ibid., p. 88.
18. Polkinghorne, “The Quantum World,” p. 334.
19. Polkinghorne, Reason and Reality, p. 86. Italics Polkinghorne's. Cf.
    Ibid., p. 88.
20. Lévi-Strauss, The Structural Anthropology (1958), pp. 82-83.
21. See the previous note.
22. Capra, The Tao of Physics, p. 35.
23. D. T. Suzuki, The Essence of Buddhism (Kyoto: Hozokan, 1968), p.
    26, quoted in Capra, The Tao of Physics, pp. 35-37. Cf. Zukav, The
    Dancing Wu Li Masters, p. 205.
24. Polkinghorne, Reason and Reality, p. 3.
25. Pagels, The Cosmic Code, p. 57.
                         BIBILOGRAPHY
Abbott, Larry. “The Mystery of the Cosmological Constant.” Scientific
American Vol. 3, No. 1 (1991): 68-79.

Barbour, Ian G. Religion and Science. London: SCM Press, 1998.

Barbour, Julian. The End of Time. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1999;

Phoenix paperbacks, 2000; third impression, 2003.

Barr, Stephen M. Modern Physics and Ancient Faiths. Notre Dame:
University of Notre Dame Press, 2003.

Barrow, John D. Impossibility: The Limits of Science and the Science of
Limits. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998; Vintage edition, 1999.

———. Theories of Everything: The Quest for Ultimate Explanation.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990; Vintage edition, 1992.

———. The World within the World. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988.

Barrow, John D. and Tipler, Frank. The Anthropic Cosmological Principle.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986.

Barrow, John, Davies, Paul and Harper, Charles, eds. Science and Ultimate
Reality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.

Bell, John. Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987.

Blanché, R. Contemporary Science and Rationalism. Translated by I.A.G.
Le Bek. Edinburgh: Oliver & Boyd, 1968.
Bohm, David. Causality and Chance in Modern Physics. London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1957; reprint, 1984.

———. “The Implicate Order: A New Approach to the Nature of Reality.”
David L. Schindler, ed. Beyond Mechanism: The Universe in Recent
Physics and Catholic Thought. Lanham: University Press of America,
1986, pp. 13-38.

———. Unfolding Meaning. London: Routledge, 1985; Ark paperbacks
reprint, 1996.

———. Wholeness and Implicate Order. London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul, 1980; reprint, 1982.

Bohm, David and Hiley, Basil. “Einstein and Non-locality in Quantum
Theory.” Maurice Goldsmith, Allen Mackay and James Woudhuysen, eds.
Einstein: the First Hundred Years. Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1980, pp. 47-
61.

———. “On the Intuitive Understanding of Nonlocality as Implied by
Quantum Theory.” Foundations of Physics 5 (1975): 95-108.

Bohr, Niels. Atomic Physics and Human Knowledge. New York: John
Wiley & Sons, 1958.

———. Atomic Theory and the Description of Nature. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1934.

———. “Discussions with Einstein on Epistemological Problems in
Atomic Physics.” Paul A. Schilpp, ed. Albert Einstein: Philosopher-
Scientist. Evanston, Ill.: 1949, pp. 210 ff.

———. “On the Notion of Causality and Complementarity.” Dialectica 2
(1948): 312-25.

Bohr, Niels and Honner, J. The Descriptions of Nature: Niels Bohr and the
Philosophy of Quantum Physics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988.
Born, Max. Atomic Physics. London: 1935.

Boslough, John, Stephen Hawking's Universe. New York: Avon Books,
1989.

Briggs, John P. and Peat, F. David. Looking Glass Universe. Simon &
Schuster, 1984; Fontana paperbacks, 1985.

Buckley, Paul and Peat, F. David. A Question of Physics: Conversations in
Physics and Biology. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1979.

Burtt, Edwin Arthur. The Metaphyiscal Foundations of Modern Physical
Science. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1924; reprint, 2000.

Capek, Milic. Bergson and Modern Physics. Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1971.

———. The Concepts of Space and Time. Dordrecht: Reidel, 1976.

———. “Do the New Concepts of Space and Time Require a New
Metaphysics?” Richard F. Kitchener, ed. The World View of Contemporary
Physics: Does It Need a New Metaphysics? Albany: State University of
New York Press, 1988, pp. 90-105.

———. The Myth of Frozen Passage: Status of Becoming in the Physical
World. Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science II. New York:
Humanities Press, pp. 441-63.

———. The New Aspects of Time. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 1991.

———. The Philosophical Impact of Contemporary Physics. Princeton,
New Jersey: D. Van Nostrand, 1961.

———. “The Unreality and Indeterminacy of the Future in the Light of
Contemporary Physics.” David Ray Griffin, ed. Physics and the Ultimate
Significance of Time. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1986,
pp. 297-309.
Capra, Fritjof. The Tao of Physics. Boston, Mass.: Shambhala Publications,
1976; Bantam revised edition, 1984.

———. The Turning Point. Simon & Schuster 1982; Fontana Paperbacks,
Flamingo edition, 1983; reprint, 1984.

Clark, R. W. Einstein: The Life and Times. New York: Avon Books, 1971.

Cohen, Robert S., ed. Time, Causality and the Quantum Theory. Dordrecht:
Reidel, 1980.

Coles, Peter, ed. The Icon Critical Dictionary of the New Cosmology.

Coveney, Peter & Highfield, Roger. The Arrow ofTime. London:
HarperCollins, 1990; Flamingo edition, 1991.

Cushing, James T. and McMullin, Ernan, eds. Philosophical Consequences
of Quantum Theory: Reflections on Bell's Theorem. Notre Dame: Notre
Dame Press, 1987.

D'Abro, A. The Rise of the New Physics. Vol. II. New York: Dover, 1951.

Davies, Paul. The Cosmic Blueprint. London: William Heinemann, 1987;
Penguin books, 1989.

———. The Edge of Infinity. J. M. Dent: 1981; Penguin Books, 1994.

———. God and the New Physics. London: J. M. Dent & Sons, 1983;
Penguin Books, 1984; reprint, 1990.

———. The Goldilocks Enigma. London: Allen Lane, 2006.

———. The Last Three Minutes. London: Wiedenfeld & Nicolson, 1994;
Phoenix paperback, 1995.

———. The Mind of God: The Scientific Basis for a Rational World. New
York: Simon & Schuster, 1992.
———. “The Mind of God.” Jan Hilgevoord, ed. Physics and Our View of
the World. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994, pp. 226-39.

———. “A Naturalistic Account of the Universe.” Michael Peterson,
William Hasker et el., eds. Philosophy of Religion. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1996, pp. 211-22.

———. “The New Physics: A Synthesis.” Paul Davies, ed. The New
Physics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989; paperback
edition, 2000.

———. Other Worlds. J. M. Dent & Sons, 1980; Penguin books, 1988.

———. Space and Time in the Modern Universe. Cambridge: Cambridge
University press, 1977.

———. Superforce. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1984; Penguin Books,
1995.

———. About Time. London: Viking, 1995.

———. “The Unfolding Universe.” Sara Nash, ed. Science and
Complexity. London: Science Reviews Ltd, 1985, pp. 27-51.

———. “What Caused the Big Bang?” John Leslie, ed. Physical
Cosmology and Philosophy. New York: Macmillan Co., 1990, pp. 220-38.

Davies, Paul and Gribbin, John. The Matter Myth: Beyond Chaos and
Complexity. Viking, 1991; Penguin Books, 1992.

De Broglie, Louis. The Revolution in Physics. Translated by Ralph W.
Niemeyer. New York: The Noonday Press, 1953.

De Riencourt, Amaury. The Eye of Shiva. London: Souvenir Press, 1980.

De Witt, Bryce and Graham, N., eds. The Many Worlds Interpretation of
Quantum Mechanics. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1973.
Dewitt, Richard. World Views. Oxford: Blackwell, 2004.

Drees, Willem B. Beyond the Big Bang: Quantum Cosmologies and God.
La Salle, Ill.: Open Court, 1990.

———. “Quantum Cosmologies and the ‘Beginning.'” Zygon (Sept. 1991):
373-96.

Eccles, John C. The Human Mystery. London: Springer International,
1979.

Eddington, Arthur. The Nature of the Physical World. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1931; Ann Arbor: The University of
Michigan Press, 1968.

Edwards, Rem B. What Caused the Big Bang? New York: Rodo pi, 2001.

Einstein, Albert. “On the Generalized Theory of Gravity.” Scientific
American (March 1950): 13-17.

Einstein, Albert and Infeld, Leopold. The Evolution of Physics. New York:
Simon & Schuster, 1938.

Einstein, Albert, Podolsky, Boris and Nathan, Rosen. “Can Quantum
Mechanical Description of Reality be Considered Complete.” Physical
Review 47 (1935).

Ferguson, Kitty. The Fire in the Equations: Science, Religion and the
Search for God. Grand Rapids: Wm Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1995;
London: Bantam Press, 1995.

Ferris, Timothy. Coming of Age of the Milky Way. New York: William
Morrow, 1988.

———. The Whole Shebang. London: Simon & Schuster, 1997.

Feynman, Richard. The Character of Physical Law. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press, 1965.
———. QED: The Strange Theory of Light and Matter. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1988.

Folse, Henry J., Jr. “Complementarity, Bell's Theorem, and the Framework
of Process Metaphysics.” Process Studies 11 (1982): 259-74.

Forrest, P. Quantum Metaphysics. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1988.

Frank, Philipp. Modern Science and Its Philosophy. Harvard: Harvard
University Press, 1949.

Gal-Or, Benjamin. Cosmology, Physics, and Philosophy. New York:
SpringerVerlag, 1981.

Goldsmith, Maurice, Mackay, Allen and Woudhuysen, James, eds.
Einstein: the First Hundred Years. Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1980.

Greene, Brian. The Elegant Universe. London: Jonathan Cape, 1999;
Vintage edition, 2000.

Grib, A. A. “Quantum Cosmology, the Role of the Observer, Quantum
Logic.” Robert John Russell, Nancey Murphy and C. J. Isham, eds.
Quantum Cosmology and the Laws of Nature. Vatican City: Vatican
Observatory Publications, 1993; second edition, 1996, pp. 165-77.

Gribbin, John. Companion to the Cosmos. London: The Orion Publishing
Group, 1996; Hyderabad: Universities Press, 1999.

———. The Omega Point. London: Bantam Books, 1988.

———. In Search of the Big Bang. London: William Heinemann, 1986;
Corgi Books, 1987.

Gribbin, John and Rees, Martin. Cosmic Coincidences. London: William
Heinemann, 1990; Black Swan edition, 1992.

Harris, Errol E. Cosmos and Anthropos. London: Humanities Press, 1999.
———. The Foundations of Metaphysics in Science. London: George
Allen & Unwin, 1965; London: Humanities paperback, 1993.

———. The Restitution of Metaphysics. New York: Humanity Books,
2000. Hawking, Stephen. A Brief History of Time. London: Bantam Press,
1988; Bantam edition, 1989.

———. The Theory of Everything. Beverly Hills: Phoenix books;
Mumbai: Jaico Publishing House, 2006; reprint, 2009.

Hawley, John F. and Holocomb, Katherine A. Foundations of Modern
Cosmology. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005.

Heelan, Patrick A. “Quantum and Classical Logic: Their Respective
Roles.” Synthese 21 (1970): 2-33.

———. Quantum Mechanics and Objectivity. The Hague: Martinus
Nijhoff, 1965.

———. “Quantum Relativity and the Cosmic Observers.” Wolfgang
Yourgrau and Allen D. Breck, eds. Cosmology, History and Theology. New
York: Plenum Press, 1977, pp. 29-38.

Heisenberg, Werner. The Physical Principles of the Quantum Theory.
Translated by Carl Eckhart and Frank C. Hoyt. New York: Dover
Publications, 1930; reprint, 1949.

———. Physics and Philosophy. New York: Harper & Row, 1958;
London: George Allen & Unwin, 1959.

———. The Principles of the Quantum Theory. Chicago, 1930.

———. “The Representation of Nature in Contemporary Physics.”
Daedalus 87 (1958): 95-108.

Heitler, Walter. “Departure from Classical Thought in Modern Physics.”
Paul A. Schilpp, ed. Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist, pp. 194ff.
Herbert, Nick. Quantum Reality. New York: Anchor Press, 1987.

Hilgevoord, Jan. Physics and Our View of the World. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1994.

Hodgson, David. The Mind Matters. Oxford: Oxford University
Press,1991; paperback edition, 1993.

Hofstadter, Doughlas R. Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid.
Basic Books, 1977; Penguin Books, 1981.

Honner, John. The Description of Nature. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1987.

Hooker, Clifford A. “The Nature of Quantum Mechanical Reality.” Robert
G. Colodny, ed. Paradigms and Paradoxes. University of Pittsburgh Press,
1972, pp. 67-301.

Hutten, Ernest H. The Language of Modern Physics. London: George Allen
& Unwin, 1956.

Isham, Chris J. “Creation of the Universe as a Quantum Process.” Robert
John Russell, William R. Stoeger and George V. Coyne, eds. Physics,
Philosophy, and Theology: A Common Quest for Understanding. Vatican
City State: Vatican Observatory Publications, 1988, pp. 375-409.

———. “Quantum Theories of the Creation of the Universe.” Robert John
Russell, Nancey Murphy and C. J. Isham, eds. Quantum Cosmology and
the Laws of Nature. Vatican City: Vatican Observatory Publications, 1993;
second edition, 1996, pp. 51-91.

James, William. “The Dilemma of Determinism.” The Will to Believe and
Other Essays in Popular Philosophy. London: Longmans Green, 1917.

Jammar, Max. The Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics. John Wiley &
Sons, 1974.
Jeans, James. Physics and Philosophy. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press; reprint, 1958.

Johansson, Lars-Gören. “Realism and Wave-Particle Duality.” Robert S.
Cohen, Risto Hilpinen and Qiu Renzog, eds. Realism and Anti-realism in
the Philosophy of Science (Beijing International Conference1992).
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1996, pp. 329-38.

Joseph, K. Babu, “The Nature of Knowledge of the Physical World: A
Mathematical-Logical Perspective.” Omega 20 (June 2021): 70-84.

Kafatos, Menas and Nadeau, Robert. The Conscious Universe: Part and
Whole in Modern Physical Theory. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1990.

Kane, Gordon. “Are virtual particles really constantly popping in and out
of existence? Or are they merely a mathematical book-keeping device for
quantum mechanics?”

https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/are-virtual-particles-rea/
accessed on 26th March 2020.

Kant, Immanuel. Critique of Pure Reason. Translated by J. M. D.
Meiklejohn. London: Dent, Everyman Library, 1934; reprint, 1974.

Kezwer, Glen Peter. Meditation, Oneness and Physics. New Delhi: Sterling
paperback, 1995.

Kline, Morris. Mathematics: The Loss of Certainty. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1980.

———. Mathematics and the Search for Knowledge. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1985; paperback edition, 1986.

Kosso, Peter. Appearance and Reality. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1998. Krauss, Lawrence M. A Universe from Nothing. New York: Free
Press, 2012. Larson, Duane, H. Times of the Trinity: A Proposal for
Theistic Cosmology. New York: Peter Lang, 1995.
Lavine, T. Z. From Socrates to Sartre: the Philosophical Quest. New York:
Bantam Books, 1984; reprint, 1989.

Lévi-Strauss, Claude. The Structural Anthropology. 1958.

Linde, Andrei. “Inflation, Quantum Cosmology and the Anthropic
Principle.” John Barrow, Paul Davies and Charles Harper, eds. Science and
Ultimate Reality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004, pp. 420-
32.

Lloyd, Seth. Programming the Universe. London: Vintage Books, 2007.

Lucas, J. R. Space, Time and Causality. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1984.

———. A Treatise on Time and Space. London: Methuen & Co., 1973.

Malville, McKim J. Time and Eternal Change. New Delhi: Sterling
Publishers, 1990.

Mangai, Poulose, Vidyajyoti Journal of Theological Reflection 78 (Dec.
2014): 941, 959-60.

Mathew, Joseph. From Cosmos to Theos: Towards a New Philosophical
Theology. Delhi: Media House, 2017.

———. In Search of Cosmic Origins: The Great Saga of the Universe.
Bangalore: Asian Trading Corporation, 2014.

Mehlberg, Henry. Time, Causality and the Quantum Theory. Vol. II.
Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1980.

Mehra, J., ed. The Physicist's Conception of Nature. Dordrecht: D. Reidel,
1973.

Morris, Richard. The Edges of Science. London: Fourth Estate, 1992.

———. The Nature of Reality. New York: Noonday Press, 1987.
Munitz, Milton K. Cosmic Understanding: Philosophy and Science of the
Universe. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1986.

———. Space, Time and Creation. New York: Collier Books, 1961.

Nagel, Ernest. The Structure of Science. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul,
1961; Harcourt, Brace & World; Fourth impression, 1974.

Newton, Isaac. Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy. Translated
by A. Motte, revised by F. Cajori. University of California Press, 1950,
Scholium II.

Novikov, Igor, Black Holes and the Universe. Translated by Vitaly Kisin.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990; Canto edition, 1995.

Odenwald, Sten F. “A Modern Look at the Origin of the Universe.” Zygon
25 (March 1990): 25-46.

Omnes, Roland. Quantum Philosophy. Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1999; Hyderabad, Universities Press, 2000.

Oppenheimer, J. R. Science and the Common Understanding. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1954.

Pacholezyk, A. G. The Catastrophic Universe. Tucson, Arizona: Pachart
Publishing House, 1984.

Pagels, Heinz R. The Cosmic Code. Michael Joseph, 1983; Penguin books,
1984.

———. The Dreams of Reason. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1989.

———. Perfect Symmetry. London: Simon & Schuster, 1985; London:
Bantam Books, 1986.

Pamplany, Augustine. Theological Mysteries in Scientific Perspective.
Bangalore: Asian Trading Corporation, 2005.
———. OMEGA: Indian Journal of Science and Religion 10 (Dec. 2017):
149-51.

Pamplany, Augustine and Kozhamthadam, Job. East-West Interface of
Reality. Aluva: ISR Publications, 2003.

Panda, N. C. Maya in Physics. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1991; reprint,
1999. ———. The Vibrating Universe. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidas, 1995;
reprint, 2008.

Peacocke, Arthur. Creation and the World of Science. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1979; reprint, 2004.

———. Theology for a Scientific Age. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1990;
second enlarged edition, London: SCM Press, 1993.

Peat, F. David. Superstrings and the Search for the Theory of Everything.
Contemporary Books, 1988; London: Abacus reprint, 1992.

Penrose, Roger. The Emperor's New Mind. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1989.

Peters, Ted. “David Bohm, Postmodernism, and the Divine.” Zygon (June
1985): 193-218.

Philipse, Herman. Heidegger's Philosophy of Being. Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1998; Delhi: Motilal Barsidass, 1999.

Polkinghorne, John C., ed. Meaning in Mathematics. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2011.

———. .“The Mind of God? Symposium: Hawking's A Brief History of
Time Reconsidered.” The Cambridge Review (March 1992): 1 – 10.

———. One World. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1987; London:
SPCK, 1986; Philadelphia: Templeton Foundation Press, 2007.
———. The Particle Play. Oxford: W. H. Freeman, 1979; paperback
edition, 1981.

———. The Quantum World. London: Longman, 1984; Pelican books
reprint, 1987; Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1989.

———. The Quantum World. London: Penguin Books, 1986.

———. “The Quantum World.” Robert John Russell, William R. Stoeger
and George V. Coyne, eds. Physics, Philosophy, and Theology: A Common
Quest for Understanding. Vatican City State: Vatican Observatory
Publications, 1988, pp. 333-42.

———. Reason and Reality. London: SPCK, 1991.

———. Science and Providence. London: SPCK, 1989.

Popper, Karl. Quantum Theory and Schism in Physics. London: Routledge,
1982; reprint, 2000.

Prigogine, Ilya. From Being to Becoming: Time and Complexity in the
Physical Science. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman & Co., 1980.

———. “The Rediscovery of Time.” Sara Nash, ed. Science and
Complexity. London: Science Reviews Ltd, 1985, pp. 11-26.

Prigogine, Ilya and Isabelle Stengers. Order out of Chaos. Bantam Books,
1984; Fontana Paperbacks, 1985.

Rae, Alastair. Quantum Physics: Illusion or Reality? Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1986; Canto edition, 1994; reprint, 2000.

Randall, John H. Jr. The Making of the Modern Mind. New York: Columbia
University Press, 1926; 50th ann. edition, 1976.

Redhead, Michael. Incompleteness, Nonlocality and Realism. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1987.
———. From Physics to Metaphysics. Cambrdige: Cambridge University
Press, 1995.

Reichenbach, Hans. Philosophic Foundations of Quantum Mechanics.
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1944; reprint, 1982.

———. The Rise of Scientific Philosophy. Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1951; reprint, 1968.

Resenthal, Sandra B. Time, Continuity, and Indeterminacy. New York:
State University Press of New York, 2000.

Reyna, Ruth. The Philosophy of Matter in the Atomic Era. Bombay: Asia
Publishing House, 1962.

Ridley, B. K. Time, Space and Things. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1976; Cambridge: Canto edition, 1995.

Rucker, Rudy. The Fourth Dimension. Boston: Houghton & Mifflin, 1984.
Russell, Robert John. “Quantum Physics in Philosophical and Theological
Perspective.” Robert John Russell, William R. Stoeger and George V.
Coyne, eds. Physics, Philosophy, and Theology: A Common Quest for
Understanding. Vatican City State: Vatican Observatory Publications,
1988, pp. 345-75.

Russell, Robert John, Murphy, Nancey and Isham, C. J., eds. Quantum
Cosmology and the Laws of Nature. Vatican City: Vatican Observatory
Publications, 1993; second edition, 1996.

Sachs, Mendel. “Space-Time and Elementary Interactions in Relativity.”
Physics Today 22 (Feb. 1969): 48ff.

Sagan, Carl. Cosmos. New York: Random House, 1980.

Schilling, Harold K. The New Consciousness in Science and Religion.
London: SCM Press, 1973.
Schilpp, Paul A. Albert Einstein, Philosopher-Scientist. Evanston, Ill.,
1949.

Schrödinger, Erwin. “Discussions of Probability Relations between
Separated Systems.” Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society
31, 555 (1935), quoted in F. A. Wolf, Taking the Quantum Leap (London:
Harper & Row, 1981), p. 189.

Selleri, F. ed. Quantum Mechanics versus Local Realism. New York:
Plenum Press, 1988.

Sharpe, Kevin J. “Relating the Physics and Religion of David Bohm.”
Zygon 25 (March 1990): 105-123.

Sheldrake, Rupert. A New Science of Life. London: Blond & Briggs, 1981;
reprint, 1985.

———. The Presence of the Past. New York: Time Books, Random
House, 1988.

Skirbekk, Gunnar and Gilje, Nils. A History of Western Thought.
Translated by Ronald Worley. Routledge: London; English translation,
2001.

Sklar, Lawrence. “Determinism.” Jaegwon Kim and Ernest Sosa, eds. A
Companion to Metaphysics. Oxford: Blackwell, 1995.

Smolin, Lee, The Life of the Cosmos. London: The Orion Publishing
Group, 1997; Hyderabad: Universities Press, 1999.

———. The Trouble with Physics. London: Penguin Books, 2006; Allen
Lane 2007.

Stapp, Henry. “Are Superluminal Connections Necessary?” Nuovo
Cimento, 40B, 1977.
———. “The Copenhagen Interpretation and the Nature of Space-Time.”
American Journal of Physics 40 (1972): 1098ff.

———. “S-Matrix Interpretation of Quantum Theory.” Physical Review
Vol. D3 (March 1971): 1303-20.

Stapp, Henry and Jones, William B., eds. “Quantum Mechanics, Local
Causality, and Process Philosophy.” Process Studies 7 (Fall 1977): 173-82.

Stewart, Ian. Does God Play Dice? The New Mathematics of Chaos.
Penguin Books, 1990.

Stoeger, William R. “Developments in Contemporary Cosmology: The
Challenges and Opportunities to Religion.” Omega 9 (Dec. 2010): 51-73.

———. “Key Developments in Physics Challenging Philosophy and
Theology.” Mark Richardson and Wesley Wildman, eds. Religion and
Science: History, Method, Dialogue. London: Routledge, 1996, pp. 183-
201.

Suzuki, D. T. The Essence of Buddhism. Kyoto: Hozokan, 1968.

Talbot, Michael. Mysticism and the New Physics. Bantam Books, 1981.

Thorne, Kip S. Black Holes and Time Warps: Einstein's Legacy. New York:
W. W. Norton & Co., 1994; London: Macmillan, Papermac edition, 1995.

Toben, Bob and Wolf, Fred Alan. Space-Time and Beyond. New York: E. P.
Dutton, 1975; Bantam Books reprint, 1987.

Trusted, Jennifer. Physics and Metaphysics. London: Routledge, 1994.

Wartofsky, Marx W. Conceptual Foundations of Scientific Thought.
London: Collier-Macmillan, 1968.

Weinberg, Steven. Dreams of a Final Theory. London: Hutchinson, 1993;
Vintage edition, 1993.
Weyl, Hermann. Philosophy of Mathematics and Natural Science.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1949.

Wheaton, Bruce C. The Tiger and the Shark: Empirical Roots of Wave-
particle Dualism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.

Wheeler, John A. “Bohr, Einstein, and the Strange Lesson of the
Quantum.” Richard Q. Elvee, ed. Mind in Nature. San Francisco: Harper &
Row, 1982, pp. 1-31.

———. A Journey into Gravity and Space-Time. New York: Scientific
American Library, 1990.

Whitehead, Alfred North. Science and the Modern World. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1926; Fontana Books, 1975.

Whittaker, Edmund. Space and Spirit. Hinsdale, Ill.: Regnery, 1948.

Wigner, Eugene. Symmetries and Reflections. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 1967.

———. “The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural
Sciences.” Communications in Pure and Applied Mathematics 13 (Feb.
1960):

Will, Clifford, Davies, Paul, eds. The New Physics. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1989.

Winstein, Steven. “Quantum Gravity.” Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/quantum-gravity/ accessed
on 7th March, 2020. First published on Dec 26, 2005; substantive revision
on May 2nd, 2019.

Wolf, F. A. Taking the Quantum Leap. London: Harper & Row, 1981.

Wood, Charlie. “What Is Quantum Gravity?” Aug 27, 2019. https://www.

space.com/quantum-gravity.html accessed on 29th April 2020.
Woodcock, Alexander and Davis, Monte. Catastrophe Theory. New York:
E. P. Dutton, 1978; Penguin Books reprint, 1982.

Young, Karl. “Deterministic Chaos and Quantum Chaology.” Mark
Richardson and Wesley Wildman, eds. Religion and Science: History,
Method, Dialogue. London: Routledge, 1996, pp. 227-42.

Zee, A. Fearful Symmetry: The Search for Beauty in Modern Physics. New
York: Macmillan, 1986; paperback edition, Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1999.

Zohar, Danah. The Quantum Self. London: Bloomsbury, 1990.

Zukav, Gary. The Dancing Wu Li Masters. New York: William Morrow &
Co., 1979; New York: Bantam Books, 1980.

The model of atom on cover page is accessed on the net on 22nd August
2020.

This free display of the model is modified.

https://www.google.com/search?
q=image+of+atom&tbm=isch&source=iu&ictx=1&fir=C3nMZYBMKLN
u4M%252ChyNuqbhSMGdgvM%252C_&vet=1&usg=AI4_-
kTnfYEO76lfVIiFPQg_
pjoBXkDT2A&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwi1o9TWgvzrAhWMV
30KHfCjDhEQ9QF6BAgEEGI&biw=1366&bih=657#imgr
                                INDEX
Anderson, Carl 167
Anti-electron neutrino 187
Anti-matter 214
Anti-muon 188
Anti-neutrino 189
Aristotle 112
—the concept of potentiality 113
Aristotelian philosophy 328
Aspect's (Alain) experiment 103
Asymptotic freedom 211

Barbour, Ian 241, 251
Barbour, Julian 72, 76, 77, 80, 96
Barr, Stephen 244, 245, 247, 248, 249
Barrow, John 100, 102, 197, 201, 209, 224, 229, 231, 233
Barrow, John and Silk, Joseph 175
Bauer, Edmond 246
Bell, John Stuart 91, 99, 101, 150
Bell inequality theorem 101-103, 105, 110
—illustration of 102-103
—implication of 106
—meaning of 101-102
—verification of 103
Berkeley, George 91, 253
Big Bang singularity 258, 259, 262
Big Bang theory 147
Big Bang and creation of child universe 270
Black body radiation 14, 33-34
Black hole 147, 258, 271
Blanché, R. 29, 84, 250-51, 284
B meson 318
Bohm, David 2, 70, 73, 74-75, 83, 84, 94, 99, 111-12, 125, 152, 166, 252
Bohm, David and Hiley, Basil 108
Bohr, Niels 12, 15-16, 18-19, 30, 62, 84, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 96, 98, 108,
110, 236, 241, 249, 285
—and Einstein debate xvii
—solution to EPR paradox 96
—structure of atoms 15
Boolean commutative law 17, 288
—distributive law 288
Born, Max 17, 21, 46-48, 69, 92, 119, 236, 238
Bosons 180, 183
—and Exclusion principle 182
—four kinds of 183
—origin of the name boson 316
—spin of 181
Briggs, John P. and Peat, David F. 223, 225
Buddhism 289
—koans 289-91
Burtt, Edwin 239-240

Camera and quantum measurement 246-48
Capek, MiliC 5, 7, 131, 152, 259, 260, 261, 267, 287
Capra, Fritjoff 47, 105, 107, 113, 124, 127-28, 141-42, 158-59, 166, 246,
252, 287
Cartelle, Paula A. 216
Causality
— in Newtonian mechanics 5-6
—in quantum physics 11
Chadwick, James 184
Classical physics
—and objectivity of the world 12 13
—wholeness in 109
Colman, Sydney and de Lucia, Frank 23, 276, 280-82
Complementarity 18-19
—of experimental arrangements 55-56
—of position and momentum 57-58
—principle of 57
—of wave and particle 53-55
Conservation of energy, —law of 169
—suspension of 170
Continuum 25-30, 261
—and Big Bang regime 27
—causality in 26
—concept of 25
—vs. discreteness 30-31
—and matter/energy 25
—meaning of 25
—in Newtonian mechanics 25-26
—and space and time 26
—in the theory of relativity 26
Copenhagen interpretation xx, 13, 19, 75, 77, 79, 83, 87-91, 93, 98
—and Immanuel Kant 88-91
Cosmological constant 163
—elimination by Einstein 314
—enormous value 314
Cosmos
—meaning of 274-75
Coveney, Peter and Highfield,
Roger 2, 48, 77, 97, 98, 253, 262
Creation and annihilation
—of particles and anti-particles 166, 167, 169, 171
—explanation of 169-70

Dark energy 214
Dark matter 214
Davies, Paul 10, 56-57, 67, 73, 93-94, 138, 199, 201, 239, 244, 251, 265,
267, 271, 276, 282, 283
Davies, Paul and Gribbin, John 69, 106, 107, 238, 241, 242
Davisson, Clinton 16
De Broglie, Louis 1, 2, 4, 7, 9, 16, 29, 32, 35, 46, 51, 59-60, 65, 66, 67, 70,
84, 117
Democritus 174
Determinism
—in classical physics 65
—Laplacian 13
—quantum 68-69
—in the theory of relativity 65
Dirac, Paul 84, 92, 119, 130, 166, 174
—discovery of particles and anti particles 172
—equation 188
Discreteness, 28-29, 30
—concept of 27-29
—of energy 34,
—in the quantum world 29
Double paradigm shift
—from Newtonian mechanics to the theory of relativity 6-7
—from Newtonian mechanics to quantum physics 6-7
Double-slit experiment 39-45
Drees, Willem 234, 257, 269, 270
Dyson, Freeman 149, 233

Eddington, Arthur 61, 251, 255
Einstein 13, 14, 49-53, 70, 84, 92, 93, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 110, 119,
130, 218, 225, 285
—rejection of determinism 92
Electron 187-88
—absorbing and emitting energy 15-16
—excited state of 276-77
—and Exclusion principle 182
—orbits of 30
—ground state of 276-77
—neutrino 188
—and positron, annihilation of 168
—unobserved 12
—as waves 16
Electromagnetic field 121, 122-23
Electromagnetic spectrum 36
Electromagnetism 139-40
Electroweak interaction 192
Electroweak theory 142-43, 191-92, 219, 226
—and gauge symmetry 202-207
—and symmetry breaking 203-204
Energy
—accountant of 169
—borrowing and paying back 137, 170, 171, 268, 279, 280
—discreteness of 14
—of empty space 164
—and frequency 14, 34-35
—ground state of 276
—levels of 276-77
—packets of 14, 35
Entanglement, quantum 104-114
—dimensions of 105-107
—instances of 107
—meaning of 104-105
—problems of 108-109
EPR paradox 91-97
—Bohr's solution to 96
—Einstein's solution to 96
—meaning of 93-94
—team: Einstein, Podolsky, Boris and Rosen, Nathan 82, 87, 93
Eternal inflation 257
Euclidean space-time 155
Everett, Hugh and DeWitt, Bryce 80
Experimental arrangements
—for position and momentum 57-58, 254-55
—for wave and particle 55-57, 254

Faraday, Michael 122
Fatemi, Renee 217
Fermi, Enrico 189
Fermions 177-78, 180, 183-90,
—family of 178
—origin of the name fermion 316
—spin of 181
Fermions and bosons,
—division into181
Ferromagnet 199-200
Feynman, Richard 19-20, 23, 45, 142, 149, 171, 285, 285
Field 116, 118
—concept of 120, 126
—and particles 119, 127-28
Fifth force 190, 218
‘Fire-breathing actualizer' 234
Forces as particle interactions 132 36, 141
Four-dimensional space 155, 264
Four forces
—strengths of 213
Free parameters 213
Frequency
—and intensity 52
—of light 52-53
—meaning of 37-38
—and wavelength 14, 34-35, 38
Frits, London 246

Gal-Or, Benjamin 65, 269
Gamma ray experiment 61-62
Gauge bosons 119, 177-78, 180, 190-93
—coupling strengths of 191
—nature of 190-91
—table of 192
Gauge symmetry 196-200, 226
—in electroweak theory 202
—in Grand Unified Theory 219-20
—importance of 208
—invariance in 197-98
—meaning of 197-99, 201
—in strong interaction 207-208
—in the Theory of Everything 229
Gauge symmetry breaking 226
—in early universe 209-212
—in electroweak theory 202-204
—meaning of 203-204
—in particle interaction 200-207
Gell-Mann, Murray 185
General theory of relativity 158-59, 261
—break down of 147, 152
Georgi, Howard 220
Gerner, Lester 16
Glashow, Sheldon 142, 187, 202, 203, 220, 226
Gluons 144, 207
—coloured 207, 208, 212
Gödel's theorem 231-32
—impact on TOE 233-34
Grand Unified theory 218-23
—construction of 219
—in the evolution of the universe 220-21
—gauge symmetry in 219-20
—and small distance scales 221-22
Gravitation 139
—in the general theory of relativity 146-47
—in Newtonian mechanics 146
Gravitational field 120-21
—in Newtonian mechanics 124
—between the Sun and the Earth 133
—in the theory of relativity 124
Gravitational fluctuation 171-72
Graviton 133, 149, 150, 153, 183
Greene, Brian 7, 23, 39, 42-43, 47, 51, 64, 84-85, 117-18, 134, 150, 163,
201, 286
Gribbin, John 29, 46, 62, 151, 205, 253, 270-71
Gribbin, John and Reese, Martin 82
Gross, David 144
Ground state of atom 15
Hadrons 185-86, 207, 208, 211-12
—meaning of the name 316
Harris, Errol E. 122, 129, 239, 250
Hawking, Stephen 68, 118, 133, 143, 146-47, 149, 150, 155, 210, 219, 224,
225, 228, 234, 259, 263, 264
—no boundary model 263-67
—and Hartle, James 22, 154, 258
—and Penrose, Roger 258
Hawley, John F. and Holocomb,
Katherine A. 257
Heisenberg, Werner von 10, 12, 16-17, 19, 59, 60-61, 84, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91,
98, 106, 110, 112, 119, 130, 174, 236, 238, 241, 253, 285
Heitler, Walter 246
Herbert, Nick 83, 106, 245-46
Hertz, Heinrich 49
Higgs boson 177, 193-96, 206
—conferring mass 193, 194
—discovery of 195
—field 193, 194, 195, 206
—mechanism 193, 194, 195
Higgs, Peter 193
Hofstadter, Douglas 232
Holism/wholism 108
—in Newtonian mechanics 106
—in quantum mechanics 105-107
Holy Grail 296
Honner, John 237
Hooker 2, 31
Huygens, Christiaan 14
Hut, Piet and Rees, Martin 282

Immutability of matter 173
Indeterminism, quantum 65-70
—and space-time framework 67
Infinities 145-51
—in the general theory 146-47
—in quantum theory 148-50
Initial conditions 73, 242-43
Inflation
—meaning of 271
—rate of 272-73
—of the universe 271-75
Interference pattern 14, 41-42, 54
—phenomena 301

James, William 113-14
Jammar, Max 246
Jeans, James 29
Joseph, Babu K. 90, 126, 252
Jordan, Pascual 17, 21, 119, 130, 288

Kafatos, Menas and Nadeau, Robert 98, 107, 108, 109, 110, 233
Kant, Immanuel 88, 89 Kezwer, Glen 53
Kirchoff, Gustav 33-34
Kline, Morris 232
Koan 289-91

Laplace, Pierre Simon de 224
—principle of 225
Lavine T. Z. 89
Lederman, Leon 223
Lenard, Philippe 50-51
Leptons 182, 187-190
—family of 178
—flavour universality 215-16
—vs. quarks 187
—table 189
Levi-Strauss, Claude 289
Light/photons
—as particle 15
—as waves 14
Linde, Andrei, 22, 255, 257, 267-68
Locality 99-101

Macrocosm, megacosm, microcosm xvi, 285
Magnetic monopole 223, 319
Malville, McKim J. 167
Mangai, Poulose xix
Many worlds hypothesis 80-82
—critique of 325-26
Matrix mechanics vii, 16-17, 288
—and wave mechanics 8, 17
Matter
—and anti-matter symmetry 315
—five levels of 180
—mutability of 172
—particles 180, 181, 182, 183-84
—(particles) and virtual particles 196
Maxwell, James 14, 32, 118, 122-24
Measurement
—and observer 12, 240-43
—and properties of quantum objects 12, 249-53
Meta-physics xvi-xvii
Microcosm 8, 116
Micro-desert 221-22
Morrison, Philip 222
Mother and child universe 269-71
Mother space-time 157
Munitz, Milton 125
Muon 188, 190
Muon g-2
experiment 190, 216-218
Muon neutrino 188
Mutability of matter 173
Mythology 289
Narrative synthesis
—method of xviii
Neutrino 188-89
Newton 14, 146
—on the concept of light 14
—on gravitation 146
—on the ideal of knowledge 224
—on space 158
Newtonian-Euclidean space 313
Newtonian mechanics 2
—assumptions of 237
—basic concepts of 3, 4
—determinism in 5-6
—causality in 5-6
—laws of motion 294
—matter as atomistic 3
—matter as occupying space 3-4
—measurement in 238
—motion in 4
—‘now' 5
—observer in 6, 238
—and ordinary world 2-3
—particle in 4
—properties of matter as intrinsic 5
—and quantum physics: paradigm shift 2
—simultaneity of time 5, 6
—space in 4-5, 157, 158
—time in 5, 158
—world view of 3
No boundary model 262-67
Non-locality 97-103
—meaning of 97-99

Observer
—and behaviour of electron 12
—in classical and quantum physics compared 11
—and measurement 240-49
—and the Newtonian world 237-40
—as participator 255
—and position and velocity 254-55
—and properties of quantum objects 249-55
—in the theory of relativity 250-51
—and wave-particle 254
Opper, Allena 218

Pagels, Heinz R. 12, 38-39, 47, 57, 69, 83, 100, 118, 150, 203, 220, 230,
249, 268, 291-92
Pamplany, Augustine xix
Parkes, Chris 216
Particle interaction 134-36
—illustration of 134
—interaction and mass 144-45
—self-interaction 135
Particles and anti-particles 22, 166
Particles and waves
—nature of 300-301
Pauli Exclusion Principle 182
Pauli, Wolfgang 21, 119, 130, 189
Peacocke, Arthur 3, 260-61
Peat, F. David 131, 153, 159, 202, 203, 223
Peierls, Rudolf 246
Penrose, Roger 85-86, 147, 232, 258, 285
Petridis, Konstantinos 216
Phase transition 274, 317
—in early universe 210-11
Philosophy 223
Photoelectric effect 15, 49-53
Photons, real 137-38
Physics and cosmology 257-58
Planck, Max 13, 14, 25
—constant, 33, 34
—discreteness of energy 32-39, 49
—epoch 228-29
—magnitudes 297
Planck regime 22, 117, 148, 151-54, 210, 262, 269, 172, 228-29
—oddity of 151
—quantization of space-time at 262-263
Plato 223
Polizer, David 144
Polkinghorne, John C. 44, 71, 80, 86, 99, 102, 105, 113, 126, 129, 146, 286,
287, 288
Popper, Karl 240, 248
Positron 188
Possibilities, quantum 73-74
Potentiality vs. actuality 113-14
Prigogine, Ilya and Isabelle Stengers 19, 66, 71
Probability
—in classical physics 243
—in quantum physics 243
—(probability) waves 46-48
Properties of physical objects
—in classical physics 12, 250
—in quantum theory 252-53
—in the theory of relativity 250-51 Psi-function 72

Quantization 29
—of space-time 153, 154
Quantum
—causality and uncertainty principle 10
—meaning of 28, 298
—and space-time 9-10
Quantum cosmology 22-23
—meaning of 257, 268
Quantum decay
—meaning of 281-82
Quantum discreteness 27-28
Quantum entanglement 104-110
Quantum field
—concept of 120-27
—as fundamental reality 130-31
—and particles 126, 129-30
Quantum field theories 21-22
—electroweak theory 142-43, 191-92, 219, 226
—Grand Unified Theory 22
—quantum chromodynamics 22, 119, 144, 192-93, 207, 208
—quantum electrodynamics 22, 119, 141-42
Quantum gravity
—domain of 152, 153
—metaphor of 156
—theories of 22, 151-57, 213
Quantum mysteries 84-85
Quantum particles
—inter-relations of 106-107
—measurement of spin 94-96
—spin of 94
—visualization of 8
Quantum physics/mechanics
—bizarre concepts of 286
—and Buddhism 291
—conceptual clarification of xviii
—holism in 105-106
—important concepts of 8
—incompleteness of 115
—infinities in 148-49
—and modifications of classical
concepts 13
—problems in 84-85
—and violation of logic 287, 288, 291
Quantum reality
—knowledge of 110-11
—as phenomenon 87, 88, 89, 91
—as potentiality 110-14
—and wave function 111-12
Quantum tunnelling 278-80
Quantum vacuum 22
—concept of 159-60
—and cosmic repulsive force 163
—and creation of the universe 267-271
—decay 278, 280-82
—false/excited 272, 274, 277-78, 280
—as fullness 160
—history of the concept of 157-60
—meta-stability of false vacuum
278, 281
—true 272-74, 278, 277, 280
Quantum vacuum fluctuation 165-74
—nature of 165-67
—of space-time 269
Quantum wave
—explanation of 46-48
Quantum world 83
—causality in 10-11
—intelligibility of 8
—and observer 11-13
—properties of objects 252-53
—space-time in 9-10, 103
—strangeness of 82-87
Quantum wholeness 97-114
—limitations of 108-109
Quarks 177, 182, 185-87, 192-93, 207, 208
—colour charges of 207
—family 178
—meaning of the name 316
—table 186

Rae, Alastair 240
Randall, John H. 238
Redhead, Michael 233
Relativity and quantum physics 6-7, 116
—incompatibility between 117
—unification of 116-18
Renormalization 149-50
Reyna, Ruth 10
Russell, Robert John 99, 249
Rutherford, Ernest 184

Sachs, Mendel 251
Salam, Abdus 142, 202, 203, 226
Scattering of electrons 134-35
Schilling, Harold K. 7
Schlegel, Richard 11
Schrödinger, Erwin 17-18, 46, 79, 84, 104, 105
—(Schrödinger's) cat 78-79
—wave equation 73, 75, 76, 243, 244, 246
Schwinger, Julian 132, 142, 149
Sciama, Dennis 148, 150
Single-slit experiment 39-40
Singularity theorem 147, 258
Skirbekk, Gunnar and Gilje, Nils 253
Smith, Eluned 216
Smolin, Lee 105, 118, 126, 150, 151, 180, 196-97, 200, 201
Space
—empty 157
—curvature (warping) of 117, 127, 121, 122, 124, 145, 146, 147, 148, 150,
153, 172, 258, 259, 261, 262
—four dimensional 155
—magnification of 160-63
Space-time
—figure of space-time foam 156
—foam (space-time) 154, 156, 157, 158, 217
—in general theory 158
—metaphor of 157
—in special theory 158
Spin of particles 94, 101, 102, 179, 82
—of electrons 181
—integer and half-integer 181, 182
—spinning top 319
Squires, Euan 249
Standard Model
—challenges to 213-18
—concept of 176-80, 179, 234-35
—incompleteness of 218
—limitations of 179, 213-14
—table of 178
Stapp, Henry 90, 106
Stoeger, William 153, 262-63
Strong nuclear force 140-41, 184- 85
Sum-over-histories 19-20, 45
Superforce and superparticle 176, 210
Superposition of possibilities 72-73, 77, 79, 85, 111, 112, 155, 242, 243,
244, 288
—in (Schrödinger's) cat experiment 79
Superspace 157, 268
Symmetry/breaking 198-99, 326
—general rule of 200
—meaning of (symmetry) 197

Tau 188
Theory of Everything 29, 223-35
—and early universe 228-29
—free parameters in 230-31
—goal of 223
—logical necessity of 231
—logical properties of 229-31
—method of constructing 225-27
—nature of 223-24, 228, 231
Thorne, Kip 156
Time
—accidental character of 260
—in Big Bang theory 259
—in the general theory of relativity 260-61
—imaginary 154-55, 264-67
—modalities of 262-64
—in Newtonian mechanics 259-60
—priority over space 261
—smearing of 154, 263, 264
—spatialization of 154-55
—zero time 258, 259, 265, 266
Tomonaga S. 132, 142
Trajectory of particles
—classical view 19-20
—Feynman's view 20
Tryon, Edward 22, 257, 267-68
Tunnel effect 279-80
Turner, Michael and Wilczek,
Frank 282

Uncertainty principle 10, 18-19, 59-64, 166, 168, 204-205
—definition of 60
—domain of 154
—effect at the Planck time 263-64
—effect on space-time fabric 152-53, 154
—and energy and time 63-64, 71, 136-37, 169-70, 268-69
—and gamma ray experiment 61-62
—and limitation of human knowledge 63
—and position and velocity 10, 60-61
—and quantum tunnelling 279-80
—scale of uncertainty 64
—and space and time 9
—violation of energy conservation law 137
Unification of four interactions 226-28
Universe
—and cosmos 274-75
—definition of 274
—destruction of 276-82
—inflation of 271-72
—at Planck regime 263-64
Vector bosons (W± and Zo)133, 143, 183, 191, 193, 194, 204, 205, 206,
211, 220
—discovery of 207
Vilenkin, Alex 22, 257, 267-68
Virtual particles 21, 119, 132, 141, 175, 177, 178
—creation of 136-37
—meaning of 132, 310
Virtual photon and real photon 137-38
Visual horizon 275
Von Neuman, John 12, 246, 247-249
Voodoo effect 98-99

Wartofsky, Max W. 85
Wave mechanics xvii, 17-18
Wave function 17, 71-75, 85-86, 246-47
—collapse of 75-82, 86, 244-45
—collapse in double-slit experiment 76
—concept of 71-73, 111
—and correlation of particles 96-97
—explanation of 74
—vs. initial conditions 242
—meaning of 242, 243
Wave and particle 8-9
—classical concepts of 54
—differences between 54
—experimental arrangements for 55-57
—quantum concepts of 55
Weak nuclear force/interaction 140, 191-92
Weinberg, Steven 117, 128, 131, 142-43, 202, 203, 208, 226
Weyl, Herman 131
Wheeler, John 12, 88, 154, 155-56, 159, 165, 236, 255, 285
Whitehead, Alfred North 260
Wigner, Eugene xxiii, 12, 119, 130, 236, 245, 256
Wilezek, Frank 144
Will, Cliford 148
Winstein, Steven 152, 153
Young, Thomas 13, 39
Yukawa, Hideki 184

Zukav, Gary 43, 49, 51, 71, 73, 76, 90, 106, 112, 239
Zweig, George 185
